November 26, 1902.

[Sidenote: Italy Gives us Little Relief.]

We had seen the ice floating in great blocks down the Neckar at
Heidelberg, and had felt the stinging winds on the hills above the old
castle; we had stamped our feet on the stone floors of the cathedral
at Strasburg to renew the circulation in our benumbed extremities
while waiting for the crowing of the rooster and the marching of the
puppets, and the striking of the bells on the famous clock; we had
seen vast fields of snow covering the Alps in every direction as we
passed through Switzerland, and had shivered in the searching cold
as we steamed down Lake Lucerne, unable to tear ourselves from the
glorious beauty that lay open to our view on every hand from the
steamer's decks; we had caught the wintry glitter of gigantic icicles
against the cliffs on either side as our train climbed the wild St.
Gothard pass -- and, in short, we had had a surfeit of cold weather,
and for days and weeks we had been sighing for Sunny Italy. Imagine
our disappointment, then, when we emerged from the Alps and entered
the land of balmy climate and blue skies (as most of us had always
ignorantly thought it to be even in winter) to find the whole world
still white around us, to run along the side of Lake Lugano and Lake
Como in a whirling snow-storm, and to arrive at Milan in a fog so
thick that it looked like it could be cut into blocks, so opaque that
at times we could not see the mighty Cathedral from our hotel, though
but little more than a block away, and so persistent that it did not
lift during the whole of our stay. Add to these conditions the slush
in the streets and the penetrating quality of the damp, cold air,
and our desire to push on at once to the farther south in search of
more genial skies will not seem unnatural. And we might have done so,
notwithstanding the attraction of the Cathedral and of Leonardo's
picture of the "Last Supper" (which, however, we expected to see on
our return to Northern Italy in the spring), had it not been for our
anxiety to get a sight of the Iron Crown of Lombardy at Monza, a few
miles north of Milan. And see it we did, in spite of the weather, as I
shall tell you more fully in a later letter. We ate our Thanksgiving
dinner at Milan, visited again and again the white marble Cathedral,
whose delicate stone lace work was touched into marvellous and weird
beauty by the snow clinging to its pinnacles and projections and
statues, saw Leonardo's picture, and the other principal sights, and
then took the train for Venice.




CHAPTER XXVII.

VENICE, BOLOGNA, FLORENCE AND PISA.


 December 8, 1902.

Though still cool, the weather was milder in Venice, so we remained a
week or so, yielding ourselves to the pensive charm of that -- 

 "White phantom city, whose untrodden streets
 Are rivers, and whose pavements are the shifting
 Shadows of palaces and strips of sky."

[Sidenote: The Queen of the Adriatic.]

Of the palaces that we visited, the one in which the poet Browning
lived, and in which his son now lives, is the best preserved, and
illustrates better than any other the almost regal state in which the
wealthy Venetians lived in the day of their commercial supremacy. One
of these old palaces on the Grand Canal is now used as a bank. Some
are used as warehouses, and others are put to still meaner uses. The
Doge's Palace is, of course, the largest and finest, but it is more
like a public building than a residence. Next to this stands the chief
architectural glory of Venice, the gorgeous Cathedral of St. Mark,
with its unequalled profusion of costly materials, and its ominously
uneven stone floor, suggesting the painful possibility that it, too,
may some day share the fate of the great Campanile, which till last
summer lifted its head three hundred and seventy-five feet in the air
from the pavement of the square in front. We found the ruins of this
graceful structure, up the winding incline of which Napoleon Bonaparte
is said to have ridden his horse to the belfry, lying in a heap on the
square surrounded by a temporary unpainted board fence. Workmen within
were making preparations for the erection of the new bell tower which
is to take the place of the old one. On the first Sunday after our
arrival we heard the Rev. Dr. Robertson, at the Presbyterian Church,
make felicitous use of the fate of the old Campanile in a sermon on
the text, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which
is Jesus Christ." Nowhere are foundations of more importance than in
Venice. The whole city is built upon piles. The Rialto Bridge, a great
marble arch of a single span, rests upon twelve thousand of these
piles, which are driven deep into the mud.

The interior of the Church of the Jesuits made more impression upon
us than any other Venetian church except St. Marks. It looks at first
view like it was lined throughout with chintz, through which runs a
green pattern; but on closer inspection you find that it is all white
marble -- the pulpit and its heavy curtains, the altar steps, the walls
from floor to ceiling, are all of white marble, and the green pattern
is nothing less than verd antique.

Some of our young people, who had already wearied of the miles of
picture galleries in Europe, manifested but little interest in the
rich collection of art at Venice, but I think that all brought away
an indelible impression of Titian's splendid "Assumption of the
Virgin." They felt a much keener interest in the marvellous skill of
the Venetian glass-makers at Murano. But their special delight was the
gondolas. They soon had their favorites among the gondoliers, and,
with Marco and Pedro propelling them, threaded the innumerable canals
in every direction, visited the outlying islands, drifted hither and
thither on the broad lagoons, and enjoyed the distant views of this
strangely beautiful city, sometimes looming through the mist, at
other times standing out sharp and clear against the red sky of a
flaming sunset.



[Sidenote: The Greatest of the Venetians.]

Nothing in all the strange history of Venice interested us so much
as the career of Fra Paolo Sarpi, "the greatest of the Venetians,"
as Dr. Alexander Robertson well calls him in his striking biography
of that illustrious thinker and man of action. An ecclesiastic whom
Gibbon calls "the incomparable historian of the Council of Trent";
a mathematician of whom Galileo said, "No man in Europe surpasses
Master Paolo Sarpi in his knowledge of the science of mathematics"; an
anatomist whom Acquapendente, the famous surgeon of Padua, calls "the
oracle of this century"; a metaphysician who, as Lord Macaulay says,
anticipated "Locke on the Human Understanding"; and a statesman who
saved Venice from the domination of the papacy -- it is no wonder that
Dr. Bedell, chaplain of the English Ambassador to Venice, should have
said that he was "holden for a miracle in all manner of knowledge,
divine and human." "As a statesman, the great Republic of Venice
committed all its interests to his guidance, and he made its history,
while he lived, an unbroken series of triumphs; in an age when the
papacy lifted high its head, and rode roughshod over the rights of
kings and peoples, he forced Pope Paul V., one of the haughtiest of
Rome's Pontiffs, to his knees, and so shattered in his hands the weapon
of interdict and excommunication that never again has it served the
interest of a wearer of the tiara. Constitutional government everywhere
owes something to Fra Paolo; and modern Italian history is the outcome
and embodiment of the principles he laid down in his voluminous State
papers. He was stronger than the papacy, for, in spite of the hatred,
persecution and protest of Pope and Curia, he lived and died within the
pale of the church, enjoying the esteem and affection of its clergy,
performing all his priestly duties, and receiving, as the Senate wrote
in its circular announcing his death to the courts of Europe, 'Li
santissimi sagramenti con ogni maggior pieta.' And he was stronger
than the Republic, for immediately after his death it began to succumb
to papal domination, and to totter to its fall."

We visited the Servite Monastery, where he lived, the bridge where he
was set upon and stabbed by the Pope's hired assassins, and where his
statue now stands, and the grave in the island cemetery of Venice where
his body rests at last after all the strange adventures and removals
made necessary by the ghoulish malice of his foes.


 December 10, 1902.

[Sidenote: Bologna, the Fat.]

The business activity of Bologna is in sharp contrast with the
stagnation and decay of Venice. It is a brisk and handsome city, with
well-paved streets, flanked by arcades like those along the Rue de
Rivoli in Paris. Bologna has an unequalled number of these colonnades.
They are so continuous, indeed, and afford such perfect protection
from the sun in summer and the rain in winter, that it is more nearly
possible to dispense with umbrellas here than in any other city in the
world. The greatest of these covered ways is the portico which winds
up the mountain just outside the city, by an easy gradation, to the
costly church of the Madonna di S. Lucca, which, as its name indicates,
possesses an image of the Virgin said to have been the work of Saint
Luke. There are no fewer than six hundred and thirty-five arches in
this colonnade, and they command lovely views on either side, as one
ascends; but the view from the church, at the top of the mountain,
caps the climax, combining, as it does, Alps, Appennines, Adriatic,
plains and cities. It is from the arches of this long colonnade up the
mountain that one gets the best impression of Bologna's towers. They
are very numerous, and many of them are out of the perpendicular. In
fact, there are more leaning towers here than in any other city in the
world. But, unlike "Pisa's leaning miracle," these are not beautiful.
They are imposing only in the grouping of a distant view, being nothing
but quadrangular masses of ugly brown brick, with no ornaments, no
windows, and indeed no known uses, the object for which they were
erected being now an insoluble mystery.

Bologna has important manufactures of silk goods, velvet, crape,
chemicals, paper, musical instruments, soap and sausages. We made full
trial of the last two mentioned commodities, and found them excellent.
But Bologna, while vital and modern, is not lacking in the matter of
antiquity and literary and historical interest. It boasts the oldest
university in the world, founded in 425 A. D. In the thirteenth century
it had ten thousand students, and it still has over a thousand. In
front of the University stands a statue of Galvani, holding a tablet
on which he is exhibiting the famous frog legs. But it is said that
"his wife was the real discoverer of galvanism, having laid some
frogs, which she was preparing for soup, beside a charged electrical
machine; and it was she who observed the convulsion in the frogs which
she touched with the scalpel, and communicated the discovery to her
husband, who repeated the experiment at the University."


 December 15, 1902.

[Sidenote: The Flower of Fair Cities.]

Florence! "City of fair flowers, and flower of fair cities!" Second
only to Rome itself in variety and wealth of historical, artistic and
literary interest, home of Dante and Boccacio, Machiavelli and the
Medici, Galileo and Amerigo Vespucci, Savonarola and Fra Angelico,
Cimabue, Giotto, Brunelleschi, Ghiberti, Donatello, Michelangelo and
Benvenuto Cellini -- what can one do in a letter like this but merely
name them and pass on, hoping for a time of larger leisure to say at
least a word concerning the most illustrious of them?

In the Uffizi Gallery, which is "a complete exemplification of the
progress and development of art," there is an octagonal room, called
the Tribune, which contains perhaps the richest aggregation of
masterpieces in the world. Sculpture is represented by the Venus de
Medici, the Young Apollo, The Wrestlers, The Grinder, and The Dancing
Faun; and painting by no less remarkable pictures. In addition to
these, the things that stand out in one's memory in connection with
Florence are Cellini's "Perseus," Ghiberti's "Doors," Michael Angelo's
"David" and his "Lorenzo de Medici," Brunelleschi's "Dome," and last,
but not least, Giotto's "Tower," "the model and mirror of perfect
architecture," of which John Ruskin says: "The characteristics of Power
and Beauty occur more or less in different buildings -- some in one
and some in another. But all together, all in their highest possible
relative degrees, they exist, as far as I know, only in one building
in the world -- the Campanile of Giotto at Florence." For the proper
appreciation of almost any other great production of art some education
in art is necessary, but any one can see the transcendant beauty of
Giotto's "Tower." Untutored as we are in these matters, we never
wearied of looking at it.

In the freshness of its undimmed splendor, there is nothing in Florence
to compare with the Medici Chapel. It is still unfinished, but has cost
up to the present time three million five hundred thousand dollars.
It is probably the most magnificent mausoleum in the world. "The
walls are covered with costly marbles, inlaid with precious stones -- a
gorgeous mosaic of the richest material."

[Sidenote: The Reformer before the Reformation.]

But, after all, the thing that lays deepest hold of us in Florence
is the story of Savonarola, Harbinger of the Reformation and Martyr
for the Truth. That little cell in the Monastery of San Marco, where
he once lived, and where his manuscript sermons, his annotated books
and his wooden crucifix are still shown; those fearful dungeons in
the Palazzo Vecchio, where the greatest man of his age endured his
forty days' imprisonment, and lay during the intervals of torture, and
spent his last hours on earth; and the bustling Piazza Della Signoria,
which witnessed the triumphant tragedy of May 23, 1498 -- Florence has
nothing else so impressive as these. We visit them with subdued hearts
and reverent spirits. "On the 22nd of May, 1498, it was announced to
Savonarola and his friends, Domenico and Maruffi, that they were to be
executed by five the next morning; our heroic preacher was thoroughly
resigned to his share of the doom, saying to Domenico, 'Knowest
thou not it is not permitted to a man to choose the mode of his own
death?' The three friends partook of the sacrament of the Holy Supper,
administered by Savonarola. He said, 'We shall soon be there, where
we can sing with David, "Behold how good and how pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity!"' They were then taken to the
tribunal, where they were divested of all their priestly decorations,
during which the bishop took Savonarola by the hand, saying, 'Thus
I exclude thee from the church militant and triumphant.' 'From the
church militant thou mayest,' exclaimed Savonarola, 'but from the
church triumphant thou canst not; that does not belong to thee.'... The
last that was beheld of him was his hand uplifted as if to bless the
people; the last that was heard of him, 'My Saviour, though innocent,
willingly died for my sins, and should I not willingly give up this
poor body out of love to him?' The cinders of the bodies of the
martyred friars were carted away, and thrown into the river Arno." But -- 

 "The Avon to the Severn runs,
 The Severn to the sea;
 And Wycliffe's dust shall spread abroad,
 Wide as the waters be."

What the principles of Wycliffe have done for England, the principles
of Savonarola may yet do for Italy. At any rate, his work for Italy is
not done yet.


 December 19, 1902.

[Sidenote: Pisa's Four Monuments.]

The four chief objects of interest at Pisa are all in a group at the
northern end of the town, and a wonderfully effective group it is: the
cloistered cemetery, or Camp Santo, with its fifty-five shiploads of
earth from the Holy Land; the Baptistery, with its remarkable echo;
the Cathedral, with the pendent lamp in the nave which suggested to
Galileo the idea of the pendulum; and that wonder of the world, the
white marble Tower, which leans thirteen feet out of the perpendicular.
We all tried in vain to stand with heels and back to the inside of the
north wall on the ground floor -- it cannot be done; one falls forward
at once. From the top there is a magnificent view of the city and the
surrounding plain, of the mountains on the east and the sea on the
west, of the city of Leghorn and the island of Elba.

From the windows of our hotel at Pisa we saw for the first time the
red gold of ripe oranges shining amid their dark green leaves in the
gardens, and rejoiced to think that at last we had reached a somewhat
milder climate, and were now leaving rigorous winter behind us.

The journey from Pisa to Rome is a long one, and the schedule was such
that we did not arrive till late at night. From the car windows we had
some impressive views of the Mediterranean by moonlight, and of the
solemn campagna, and, thus prepared, we crossed the Tiber at midnight,
and passed through the breach in the walls which has been made for the
railway, feeling, perhaps even more deeply than is usual, the thrill
with which all travellers except those who are utterly devoid of
imagination first enter the Eternal City.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

SOME LITTLE ADVENTURES BY THE WAY.


 December 21, 1902.

[Sidenote: Conditions Unfavorable to Letter-writing Abroad.]

The margin of leisure left to a traveller in Europe for the writing of
letters is, after all, a very narrow one, as those of my readers who
have been abroad will readily remember. One generally moves from place
to place in such rapid succession that the feeling of being settled,
which is essential to the most satisfactory writing, is almost unknown.
Then, when one does stop for a few days in a historic city, each day
is so full of interest, and the golden opportunity to see its sights
seems so fleeting, that one hesitates to take any part of such time for
writing, to say nothing of the weariness and drowsiness of an evening
that follows a day of sightseeing.

Add to this the amount of time required of one who acts as general
director of the tour, and has to take account of all manner of business
details, and the number of questions to be answered when there are
three or four young people in the party who have read just enough
general history to make their minds bristle with interrogations at
every interesting place, and who have to be read to daily en masse
on the spot in order to improve the psychological moment of excited
curiosity; add also the physician's injunction to take abundance of
exercise in the open air, in order to the full recovery of health and
the laying up of strength for future work, and his earnest counsel not
to linger much at a writing desk or a study table -- and it will be seen
that if the continuity of this series of letters suffers an occasional
break, it is but the natural result of the conditions of tourist life.

[Sidenote: An American Baby in Europe.]

It may interest some of my younger readers to know that the member
of our party who receives the most attention is a little blue-eyed
girl, just two years old to-day, who is the most extraordinary
traveller of her age that I ever saw or ever heard of, accepting all
the irregularities, inconveniences and discomforts of this migratory
mode of life with the serene indifference of a veteran. We naturally
supposed that, being so young, she would give us more or less trouble
on so long a journey, and this proved to be true on the cold and rough
sea voyage, but, from the day that we landed on this side of the ocean,
she has been a delight to our whole party, a maker of friends wherever
we have gone, and an immensely interesting object to the populace of
the cities through which we have passed. At Leyden, in Holland, as we
passed along the streets, we were followed all over town by an admiring
throng of Dutch children, just out of school, to whom our baby's bright
red coat and cap were no less interesting than their wooden shoes were
to us; and so we found out how the elephants and monkeys and musicians
and other people who make up the street parade of a circus may be
supposed to feel when they pass through a town followed by the motley
gang of school boys, ragamuffins, and general miscellanies of humanity.

[Sidenote: Something New in Venice.]

At Wiesbaden, in Germany, we bought one of those odd little German
baby carts with two wheels and two handles, like plow handles, between
which the person who pushes it walks, the baby really riding backwards,
instead of forwards, as in our American baby carriages. You will see
from this description that German baby carriages are like the German
language -- all turned the wrong way, though it must be said for this
arrangement that the baby is not so likely to be lonesome as when
riding face forward, since she always has some one to look at. Well,
at Venice, which is almost a dead town now, so far as business is
concerned, and which has perhaps as large a leisure class -- that is,
street loafers -- as any city of equal size on this terraqueous planet,
a lady of our party essayed to take the baby out for an airing in her
German cart. It would appear that it was the first time since the
foundation of that pile-driven city in the sea that a pair of wheels
was ever seen on her streets. At any rate, from the moment that the
lady and the baby and the cart emerged from the hotel door they were
attended by an ever-increasing throng of unwashed Venetians, whose
interest could not have been keener had Santos Dumont's air-ship or a
Japanese jinriksha suddenly appeared in their gondola-ridden town, and
who commented in shrill Italian on this wheeled apparition. The lady is
not easily beaten when she decides to do anything, but, after standing
that for half a block or so, she made a hasty retreat to the hotel, and
wheels disappeared, probably forever, from the streets of Venice.

[Sidenote: Gondolas and Gondoliers.]

Although Venice, with its population of one hundred and sixty-three
thousand, is seven miles in circumference, and is divided by one
hundred and forty-six canals into one hundred and seventeen islands,
yet these are so joined together by means of four hundred bridges that
it is possible to walk all over the city. But the bridges are built in
steps, and cannot be used by wheeled vehicles. There are no horses or
carriages of any kind. The funereal-looking gondola, always painted
black, is the only conveyance upon these streets of water, and does
duty for cab, omnibus, wagon, cart, wheelbarrow and hearse. It is used
for pleasure riding, shopping, church-going, theatre-going, visiting,
carrying prisoners to jail, carrying the dead to the cemetery -- in
short, for everything.

In propelling this black but graceful and easy-going boat, the
gondolier does not sit. He stands, on a sort of deck platform towards
the stern, and to balance his weight there is affixed to the prow a
heavy piece of shining steel, which rears itself at the front almost
like a figure-head, only this is always of the same pattern, simply
a broad, upright blade of steel, notched deeply on the front edge.
The gondolier does not pull the oar, he pushes it -- there is only one
oar -- and he does not change it from side to side, as in paddling a
canoe, but makes all the strokes on one side, a thing that looks very
easy, but is in fact extremely difficult. The dexterity of these men
with their long single oar is wonderful. They glide in and out among
scores of gondolas on the crowded canals without collision or jerking,
and they turn a corner within an inch.

[Sidenote: Baggage Smashing in Europe.]

These remarks upon the skill of the gondoliers, and the ease and safety
of the gondolas, remind me, by contrast, of the destructive bungling
of a porter in Cologne, who undertook to cart a load of trunks and
handbags and shawl-straps down from our hotel to the Rhine steamer, and
who, in turning a corner on a down grade, made the turn too short, and
hurled the whole lot of our belongings into the muddy street with such
violence that many of them were defaced, some permanently damaged, and
one valise broken to pieces and utterly ruined.

That German baby carriage had an exciting adventure also on the night
of our arrival in Rome. As usual, it was made the apex of the pyramid
of trunks and grip-sacks which constitute our sign manual, so to
speak, on the top of every omnibus that takes us from the station to
the hotel; but in this instance it was carelessly left untied, so
that as we went steeply down one of the seven hills of Rome, the cart
tumbled from its high perch to the stone-paved street, snapping off one
of the handles, and suffering sundry other shattering experiences. A
few days after we had the pleasure of paying a fraudulent cabinetmaker
more for repairing it than it cost in the first instance. The Italian
workmen and shopkeepers uniformly charge you more than their work and
goods are worth. I think I have had more counterfeit money passed on me
in the short time I have been in Italy than I have had in all the rest
of my life before, and the very first swindle of this kind to which I
was subjected was in a church, when the sacristan gave me a counterfeit
two-franc piece in change as I paid the admission fees to see certain
paintings and sculptures behind the high altar.

However, I am wandering from my subject; I may conclude my eulogy
on the baby above mentioned by saying that, young as she is, she
sits through the seventy or eighty minutes of the customary tedious
European dinner almost as circumspectly as a graven image might, but
reminding us of one of Raphael's cherubs in her blue-eyed combination
of sweetness, archness and dignity.

Next time we will resume our account of matters of more general
interest.




CHAPTER XXIX.

RELICS IN GENERAL, AND THE IRON CROWN OF LOMBARDY IN PARTICULAR.


 ROME, December 23, 1902.

I had heard of relics before. Years ago I had read Mark Twain's account
of the large piece of the true cross which he had seen in a church in
the Azores; and of another piece which he had seen in the Cathedral
of Notre Dame in Paris, besides some nails of the true cross and a
part of the crown of thorns; and of the marble chest in the Cathedral
of San Lorenzo at Genoa, which he was told contained the ashes of St.
John, and was wound about with the chain that had confined St. John
when he was in prison; and of the interesting collection shown him in
the Cathedral of Milan, including two of St. Paul's fingers and one
of St. Peter's, a bone of Judas Iscariot (black, not white), and also
bones of all the other disciples (presumably of the normal color), a
handkerchief in which the Saviour had left the impression of his face,
part of the crown of thorns, a fragment of the purple robe worn by
Christ, a picture of the Virgin and Child painted by St. Luke, and a
nail from the cross -- adding in another place that he thought he had
seen in all not less than a keg of these nails.

But I had hardly taken Mark Twain seriously in these statements, not
knowing at the time that his Innocents Abroad was, notwithstanding
its broad humor, really one of the best guide-books to Europe that was
ever written.

[Sidenote: The Palladium of Venice.]

I had read repeatedly the story of the bringing of St. Mark's bones
from Alexandria, in Egypt, to their present resting-place in St. Mark's
Cathedral at Venice -- a story which is related as follows in that same
lively volume:

"St. Mark died at Alexandria, in Egypt. He was martyred, I think.
However, that has nothing to do with my legend. About the founding of
the city of Venice -- say four hundred and fifty years after Christ -- (for
Venice is much younger than any other Italian city), a priest dreamed
that an angel told him that until the remains of St. Mark were brought
to Venice, the city could never rise to high distinction among the
nations; that the body must be captured, brought to the city, and
a magnificent church built over it; and that if ever the Venetians
allowed the Saint to be removed from his new resting-place, in that
day Venice would perish from off the face of the earth. The priest
proclaimed his dream, and forthwith Venice set about procuring the
corpse of St. Mark. One expedition after another tried and failed, but
the project was never abandoned during four hundred years. At last it
was secured by stratagem, in the year eight hundred and something.
The commander of the Venetian expedition disguised himself, stole the
bones, separated them, and packed them in vessels filled with lard. The
religion of Mahomet causes its devotees to abhor anything in the nature
of pork, and so when the Christian was stopped at the gate of the city,
they only glanced once into the precious baskets, then turned up their
noses at the unholy lard, and let him go. The bones were buried in
the vaults of the grand cathedral, which had been waiting long years
to receive them, and thus the safety and the greatness of Venice were
secured. And to this day there be those in Venice who believe that if
those holy ashes were stolen away, the ancient city would vanish like a
dream, and its foundation be buried forever in the unremembering sea."

[Sidenote: The Gift of Leo XIII. to London.]

More recently I had read of what has been well called the burlesque
enacted at Arundel Castle no longer ago than in July, 1902, in which
the Duke of Norfolk, Cardinal Vaughan, and many lesser ornaments and
dignitaries of the Romish Church, took part.

"Pope Leo XIII., in order to show his 'good-will to England,'
sent from Rome the remains of St. Edmund to garnish the new Roman
Catholic cathedral at Westminster. It was an appropriate gift, for
such buildings are usually garnished with 'dead men's bones and all
uncleanness.' But as the cathedral is not yet finished, as a further
token of good-will, the relics were committed to the care of no less
a personage than the Earl Marshal of England. They arrived at Arundel
on the evening of July 25th, and were placed for the night in Fitzalen
Chapel. The next morning the whole castle was astir betimes, for the
great event of the day, the transference of the bones to the castle
chapel, was to take place. This was accomplished in a solemn and
befitting manner. A procession was formed, and, to the measured tread
of the Earl Marshal of England, Cardinal Vaughan, several archbishops
and bishops, and a mixed company of priests and acolytes and a numerous
train of household servants and dependents, carrying banners, crosses,
crucifixes, censers, lamps, candles, torches, and other ecclesiastical
stage paraphernalia, the remains of St. Edmund were borne to their
resting-place. All went off well, and at last the curtain fell on
the finished play, to the satisfaction of every one. Unfortunately,
however, the Pope and all concerned had to reckon with English
common-sense and with English love of truth, and it was not very long
before it was proved to the world that the bones, like most relics of
the kind, were counterfeit -- whoever else's bones they were, they were
not those of St. Edmund." 

[Sidenote: The Blood of St. Januarius.]

I had read with cordial approval Mark Twain's animadversions upon the
fraud which is regularly practiced on the people of Naples by the
priests in the Cathedral:

"In this city of Naples they believe in and support one of the
wretchedest of all religious impostures one can find in Italy -- the
miraculous liquefaction of the blood of St. Januarius. Twice a year
the priests assemble all the people at the Cathedral, and get out
this phial of clotted blood, and let them see it slowly dissolve
and become liquid; and every day for eight days this dismal farce
is repeated, while the priests go among the crowd and collect money
for the exhibition. The first day the blood liquefies in forty-seven
minutes -- the church is full then, and time must be allowed the
collectors to get around; after a while it liquefies a little quicker
and a little quicker every day, as the houses grow smaller, till on
the eighth day, with only a few dozen present to see the miracle, it
liquefies in four minutes. 

"And here, also, they used to have a grand procession
of priests, citizens, soldiers, sailors, and the high dignitaries
of the city government, once a year, to shave the head of a made-up
Madonna -- a stuffed and painted image, like the milliner's dummy -- whose
hair miraculously grew and restored itself every twelve months. They
still kept up this shaving procession as late as four or five years
ago. It was a source of great profit to the church that possessed the
remarkable effigy, and the public barbering of her was always carried
out with the greatest éclat and display -- the more the better, because
the more excitement there was about it the larger the crowds it drew
and the heavier the revenues it produced -- but at last the day came
when the Pope and his servants were unpopular in Naples, and the city
government stopped the Madonna's annual show.

"There we have two specimens of these Neapolitans -- two of the silliest
possible frauds, which half the population religiously and faithfully
believed, and the other half either believed or else said nothing
about, and thus lent themselves to the support of the imposture."

[Sidenote: The House of the Virgin at Loretto.]

I had read the story of the Casa Santa, or Holy House, the little
stone building, thirteen and one-half feet high and twenty-eight feet
long, in which the Virgin Mary had lived at Nazareth. In 336 the
Empress Helena, mother of Constantine the Great, made a pilgrimage
to Nazareth and built a church over the Holy House. This church fell
into decay when the Saracens again got the upper hand in Palestine,
and when the Christians lost Ptolemais the Holy House was carried by
angels through the air from Nazareth to the coast of Dalmatia. This
miraculous transportation took place in 1291. A few years later it
was again removed by angels during the night, and set down in the
Province of Ancona, near the eastern coast of Italy, on the ground
of a widow named Laureta. Hence the name, Loretto, given to the
town which sprang up around it for the accommodation of the thousands
of pilgrims who flocked thither, and which is now a place of some six
thousand inhabitants, whose principal business is begging and the sale
of rosaries, medals and images. In a niche inside the Casa Santa is a
small black image of the Virgin and Child, of cedar, attributed, of
course, to St. Luke. We did not visit Loretto, but at Bologna we had
the satisfaction of seeing a fac-simile of the Casa Santa, with its
little window and fireplace, and the replica of St. Luke's handi-work
in the niche above. A large number of women, some of them handsomely
dressed, were saying their prayers and counting their beads before
the altar that had been erected in front of these images and the Holy
House, and a few were kneeling in the narrow space behind the altar,
close to the fireplace of the house. As we passed, one of these women,
in plainer garb, interrupted her devotions long enough to hold out her
hand to us, begging for pennies, but without rising from her knees.
There was nothing unusual about this, except that this beggar made her
appeal to us while actually on her knees to the image of the Virgin,
for nothing is more common in Italy than for visitors to a Roman
Catholic church to pass through such "an avenue of palms" when leaving
it.

[Sidenote: The Wonder-working Bones of St. Anne in Canada.]

I had even seen a few relics, not mere reproductions like that of the
Casa Santa at Bologna, but the relics themselves. For instance, three
summers ago, when in Quebec, I had made a special trip to the Church
of St. Anne Beaupre, some twenty miles below the city, for the purpose
of seeing the wonder-working relics of St. Anne, the alleged mother
of the Virgin Mary -- a bit of her finger bone and a bit of her wrist
bone -- which are devoutly kissed and adored by thousands of pilgrims
to this magnificent church from all the French and Irish portions of
Canada, and which are said to have wrought miraculous cures of all
manner of maladies, cures which are attested by two immense stacks
of canes, crutches, wooden legs, and the like, which rise from the
floor almost to the roof on either side of the entrance. In the store
in another part of the church I had got a clue to it all by seeing
the poor pilgrims buying all sorts of cheap, tawdry, worthless little
images and pictures, and especially little vials of oil of remarkable
curative virtue because it had stood for a while before the image of
St. Anne, and for which they paid probably five times as much as the
oil had cost the priests who were selling it.

[Sidenote: The Iron Crown of Lombardy.]

These, then, are potent bones and images and oils, but by far the
most interesting relic I had seen before reaching Rome itself was the
Iron Crown of Lombardy, at Monza, a little town in Northern Italy.
This is the place where the good King Humbert was assassinated on the
29th of July, 1900, and it is not without interest for other reasons.
For instance, it has a cathedral built of black and white marble
in horizontal stripes, and containing, besides the tomb of Queen
Theodolinda and other interesting objects in the nave and its chapels,
a great number of costly articles of gold and silver, set with precious
stones, in the treasury, as well as various relics, such as some of the
baskets carried by the apostles, a piece of the Virgin Mary's veil,
and one of John the Baptist's teeth. But we should never have made a
special trip to Monza in such weather as we were having at the time of
our visit, last November, had it not been for our intense desire to see
its chief treasure, the Iron Crown, the most sacred and most celebrated
diadem in the world, a relic possessing real historical interest, not
because of any probability whatever in the story of its origin, but
because of the extraordinary uses and associations of it within the
last thousand years.

[Sidenote: A Winter Trip to Monza.]

So, regardless of the wet, cold, foggy weather that we found in
Milan, and the rivers of mud and slush that were then doing duty for
streets, and the splotches of snow that lay here and there in the
forlorn-looking olive orchards, we took the electric tram, which was
comfortably heated, and ran out to Monza, a distance of some ten miles.
When we stepped into the chilly cathedral and looked about us, we could
not at first see anybody to show us around, though there were a good
many poor people saying their prayers there. Evidently the custodians
were not expecting tourists at such a season and in such weather.
But presently, in an apartment to the left, we found a number of the
priests warming their hands over a dish of twig coals covered with a
light layer of white ashes, which they kindly stirred a little to make
them give forth more heat as they saw us stretch our cold hands also
towards the grateful warmth.

[Sidenote: The Treasury of the Cathedral.]

When we asked if we could see the Iron Crown, they said we could; but
instead of going at once to the chapel in which it is kept, they got a
great bag of keys, large keys, thirty-seven in number, as the observant
statistician of our party ascertained, and led us into the treasury and
unlocked a great number of doors (one of which had seven locks), and
showed us the costly objects and precious relics above mentioned. We
were only mildly interested in these -- even in the apostolic baskets,
the Virgin's veil, and John the Baptist's tooth -- partly because we were
so cold and partly because of our greater interest in the more famous
relic which we had come especially to see.

[Sidenote: The Chapel of the Great Relic.]

At last one of the priests, attended by an acolyte, took up a censer,
placed a little incense on the coals with a teaspoon, and, swinging it
in his hand by the chain, led us back into the cathedral, turned to
a chapel on the left, unlocked an iron gate in a tall railing which
separated this chapel from the body of the building, closed the gate
again when our party had come inside, and, while a dozen or so of
the people who had been at their devotions crowded up to the railing
and peered curiously through, he and his attendant began to kneel
repeatedly before the altar and to swing the smoking censer on every
side. Above the altar was a strong, square steel box, over which, in
plain view, was suspended a fac-simile of the Iron Crown, made of
cheaper materials, while the real crown was still concealed within the
steel safe.

[Sidenote: The Great Relic itself.]

Handing the censer to his attendant, that it might be kept swinging
without intermission, the priest produced another series of keys and
proceeded to unlock a succession of small doors in the side of the
metal safe, which proved to be a "nest" of caskets, one within another,
the last of which was a glass case. Drawing this out, he brought into
full view the venerated crown of the Lombard kings, and told us to step
up on the stool by the altar so as to see it better. It is made of six
plates of gold, joined end to end, richly chased, and set with splendid
jewels. But one would see at a glance that neither the material, nor
the workmanship, nor the gems, could account for the unique reverence
with which it has been regarded for centuries, and an indication of
which we had just seen in the service conducted by the priest. Among
the regalia in the Tower of London, and at several other places in
Europe, we had seen crowns which far surpassed this one in costliness
and beauty, but none of which, nor all of which combined, had ever
excited a thousandth part of the interest attaching to this old crown
in Monza.

[Sidenote: Why the Crown is so Sacred.]

The explanation is this: within that ring of jointed plates of gold
runs a thin band of iron, which priestly tradition says was made of one
of the spikes that fastened the feet of our Lord Jesus Christ to the
cross. It was this band of iron that we tiptoed to see, hardly noticing
the bejewelled rim of gold around it. It was on account of this band of
iron that the priest and his attendant swung their censer and performed
their ceremony as we entered. It was this band of iron that gave to the
crown its sacred place above the altar. It was for the safe keeping of
this band of iron that the steel case, with its numerous locks, was
made. It was from this band of iron that the diadem received its name,
the Iron Crown of Lombardy.

[Sidenote: How it was Used by Charlemagne and Napoleon.]

And what were the historical uses of it, referred to above, which made
it so much more interesting to us than the many other so-called nails
of the true cross elsewhere? Well, this among others: on the last
Christmas day of the eighth century, while Charlemagne was kneeling
with uncovered head before the high altar of St. Peter's in Rome,
the Pope approached him from behind, and, placing the Iron Crown of
Lombardy on his head, hailed him as Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.

A thousand years later on the 26th of May, 1805, Napoleon Bonaparte,
"watched by an apparently invincible army which adored him and a world
which feared him," standing in the vast marble cathedral at Milan,
with fifteen thousand of his soldiers around him, lifted this same
Iron Crown of Lombardy into their view, and placed it upon his brow,
saying, "God has given it to me, let him touch it who dares!"

[Sidenote: High Reflections and Hard Cash.]

That men who, like Charlemagne and Napoleon, had reached the highest
pinnacle of human power, should seek to enhance their influence by
crowning their heads with one of the nails which, as their followers
believed, had pierced the Galilean's foot, is a richly suggestive fact.
But we must keep our tempted thoughts to another and less edifying line
at present.

When we had examined all the parts of the famous crown to our
satisfaction, we stepped to the desk in the ante-room and paid our five
francs (one dollar), the regular price for the exhibition of the Iron
Crown, then left the cathedral, bought one or two post-card pictures of
the crown, and took the tram through the dreary weather back to Milan,
well pleased with the results of our first pilgrimage to the shrine of
a real Roman Catholic relic in Italy.

[Sidenote: Rome Caps the Climax.]

But on our arrival at Rome, a month later, we found that, interesting
as were the relics which we had seen or read of elsewhere, they were
nothing to those in the Eternal City itself. In this, as in everything
else except such little matters as cleanliness and morality and
truthfulness and honesty, Rome outvies all her rivals. It is only fair
to add, however, that, since the overthrow of the papal sovereignty and
the establishment of a capable government, Rome has improved immensely
in the matter of cleanliness, and even her immorality is not so
flaunting as it was. This is attested by the Hon. Guiseppe Zanardelli,
the present Premier of Italy, who says:

"The church appears better than it once was. I no longer see in Rome
what I used often to see in my young days, ladies driving about its
streets with their coachmen and footmen in the liveries of their
respective cardinals. Has this improvement come about because the
church is really growing better? Nothing of the kind. It is because the
strong arm of the law checks the villainy of the priests." That is the
testimony of the Prime Minister of Italy.

 

[Sidenote: Do American Roman Catholics Believe in the Relics?]

A few weeks after my return from Italy, while driving one afternoon
with a friend of mine, a lawyer of high intelligence and wide
information, our conversation turned to the subject of the recent death
of Pope Leo XIII., and from that drifted to the alleged liquefaction
of the blood of St. Januarius, and from that to relics in general. I
mentioned some of the facts above stated concerning the numerous pieces
of the true cross and the miracle-working bones and oils to be seen in
Roman Catholic churches in Europe. "But," he said, "surely the Roman
Catholics in America do not believe in such mediæval superstitions."
I happened to have in hand a couple of copies of a daily newspaper,
published in one of our Southern towns, dated August 9, 1903, and
August 17, 1903, respectively, containing extracts from the letters of
a Roman Catholic bishop, the highest dignitary of his church in that
State; and, for answer to my friend's remark, I cited the following
passage from the bishop's letter of July 10th, written from Munich,
concerning the abbey church of Scheyern:

"The chapel of the Holy Cross is specially sacred, as within is
preserved a very large piece of the true cross upon which Christ was
crucified, brought to Scheyern in 1156 by Count Conrad, the Crusader,
who afterwards entered the monastery as lay-brother, and lies buried
near the altar upon which the sacred relic is preserved."

Also the following passage from his letter of July 12th, written from
Eichstadt:

"I remained the guest of Prince Ahrenberg for the night, and early
in the morning, accompanied by some Benedictine students, I made a
pilgrimage to the shrine of St. Walburg. Above the altar is the large
silver receptacle into which flows the miraculous oil from her sacred
relics, which is known the world over."

[Sidenote: What America Needs is Some Relics.]

Writing from Vienna, July 20, 1903, concerning the imperial palaces,
he says, "They are awfully big and grand, and cost a lot of good
people's money," but adds that "the pride and glory of Vienna" is the
Cathedral, and then exclaims: "How often have I wished we could have
some such church in -- -- , so that our good people who cannot visit the
achievements of Catholic life in Europe could form some idea of the
greatness of the religion of their fathers!"

One hesitates to differ from so good an authority on such matters as
this bishop, but really would he not agree, on reflection, that what
this benighted and decaying country of ours needs to bring it up to a
level with Italy and Austria and Spain is not a big church, but some
relics? Would not some miraculous oil, or some wonder-working bones, or
a piece of the true cross, or one of the nails, if placed on exhibition
here attract far more attention than a big church, and enable "our good
people who cannot visit the achievements of Catholic life in Europe"
to form a much better "idea of the greatness of the religion of their
fathers"? Does it not seem strange that so many hundreds of these
relics should be kept in those enlightened and happy countries like
Italy, where "the achievements of Catholic life" are so well known,
and where Mother Church has for centuries had full sway, and that none
of them should be brought to these benighted Protestant regions, where
they could effect such a salutary change in the faith of the people?
But, seriously, as I added to my friend in the conversation referred
to, I have a better opinion of the intelligence of our good Roman
Catholic people in America than to believe that they put the slightest
credence in these childish superstitions. Whatever the bishop above
quoted may believe, I am confident that the intelligent Roman Catholic
people of our country have no more faith in many of these alleged
relics than we have.




CHAPTER XXX.

ROMAN CATHOLIC RELICS AT ROME.


We reached Rome at a good time for seeing relics, as the special
services of the Christmas season were just beginning. One of the most
splendid of these ceremonies is the procession in honor of the Santa
Culla; that is, the cradle in which the priestly tradition says the
infant Jesus was carried into Egypt. This is the great relic and chief
distinction of the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, though it contains
a number of others, such as the bodies of St. Matthew and St. Jerome,
and two little bags of the brains of Thomas á Becket, and "one of the
pictures attributed to St. Luke (and announced to be such in a papal
bull attached to the walls!), much revered for the belief that it
stayed the plague which decimated the city during the reign of Pelagius
II., and that (after its intercession had been sought by a procession
by order of Innocent VIII.) it brought about the overthrow of the
Moorish dominion in Spain."

[Sidenote: The Miraculous Snow in Summertime.]

Moreover, this church of Santa Maria Maggiore is by no means lacking
in legendary and architectural interest. It was founded A. D. 352, by
Pope Liberius and John, a Roman patrician, to commemorate an alleged
miraculous fall of snow, which covered this spot of ground and no
other, on the 5th of August, and an alleged appearance of the Virgin
Mary, in a vision, at the same time, showing them that she had thus
appropriated the site of a new temple, all of which is duly represented
in a fine painting on the wall of the church, and in two of Murillo's
most beautiful pictures in the Academy at Madrid, and commemorated
every year on the 5th of August by a solemn high mass, and by showers
of white rose leaves thrown down constantly through two holes in the
ceiling, "like a leafy mist between the priests and the worshippers."

[Sidenote: A Splendid Church.]

The worshippers of the Virgin have not been lacking in their efforts to
erect a suitably sumptuous building on the site of this "miracle." The
magnificent nave, with its avenue of forty-two columns of Greek marble,
surmounted by a frieze of mosaic pictures; the glorious pavement of
opus Alexandrinum, whose "crimson and violet hues temper the white
and gold of the walls"; the grand baldacchino, with its four porphyry
columns wreathed with gilt leaves; and the splendid tomb chamber of
Pius IX. (predecessor of the late Pope Leo XIII.), with its riot of
rich marbles and alabaster, in front of the high altar -- to say nothing
of the almost incredibly costly chapels opening into the nave -- combine
to give S. Maria Maggiore a proud place among the very finest of the
fine basilicas of Rome.

[Sidenote: A Dazzling Scene.]

But not all the splendors of the building, nor all the fascination of
its "miracles" and legends, nor all the spell of its other relics, can
equal the interest attaching to the "SANTA CULLA," the holy cradle. On
the afternoon of Christmas Day, we walked through the wet streets to
the front of the church, pushed back the heavy, dirty screen of padded
canvas, such as hangs at the door of every great church in Italy,
however fine, and, stepping within, found ourselves in the midst of
a scene of the most dazzling splendor. The building was brilliantly
illuminated with hundreds of electric lights and huge candles, which
were sharply reflected by the glistening marbles on every hand; the
air was heavy with clouds of incense, through the blue smoke of which
the lofty ceiling looked higher than ever, and the organ and choir
were pouring forth the richest music, while a dense crowd of people,
many thousands, all standing, watched with eager interest a small,
crate-like object, made of slats of dark wood, which rested on the
high altar, enclosed in a glass case, with a gold baby on top and gold
ornaments round about.

[Sidenote: The Holy Cradle.]

We pushed our way through the crowd, so as to get a satisfactory view
of it while the service was in progress -- the genuflections, the robing
and disrobing of the archbishop, the chanting, and the rest -- after
which six men, dressed in pure white from head to foot (white gloves
included), except for a red circle and cross on the breast, knelt
before the cradle, then lifted it from the altar, with its gold and
glass setting, and placing it on a kind of litter on their shoulders,
under a gilt and white canopy borne by other attendants, marched with
it thus, in procession around the church, along with a large crucifix
under another canopy, and followed by a long line of cardinals,
bishops, priests and acolytes, carrying it back finally to its place in
the sacristy, where it will remain till next Christmas Day.

[Sidenote: The Christ of Rome a Babe or a Corpse.]

We squeezed our way through the great crowd at the door, and walked
back to our hotel, wondering to what extent the usual Roman Catholic
conception of Christ had deprived that organization of real spiritual
energy; for, almost invariably, Roman Catholic art represents him
either as a dead Christ on the cross, or a babe in his mother's arms,
and hardly ever as the risen and glorified Lord, the Conqueror of
death, the Leader of his people, to whom all power is given in heaven
and on earth -- the more usual Protestant conception. And we asked
ourselves whether this difference did not help to explain the greater
hopefulness, vigor and growth of Protestant Christianity in these
strenuous latter days.

[Sidenote: The Little Doll that Owns a Large Carriage.]

But we were soon to learn that the Roman Catholics did not think of the
infant Christ as lacking in power of a certain sort; on the contrary
they ascribe miraculous agency even to an image of the divine babe. On
the afternoon of December 29th, as two of our party were returning to
our hotel, they passed at the foot of the Capitoline Hill a carriage,
out of the window of which hung a ribbon or sash of cloth of gold, and
they were not a little astonished to observe that, as this carriage
rolled along, people knelt reverently before it on the street. Inside
they saw two bareheaded men holding a child on a pillow with a wealth
of lace about it. They thought perhaps it was the royal carriage with
the baby princess, but they could not imagine why men should be
nursing the baby, as that is usually the employment of women, nor why
the people should kneel so reverently before the young princess, a
thing which they never did even for the king himself. The fact is that,
as they learned on the following afternoon when visiting the Church of
Ara Coeli, on the Capitoline Hill, the carriage in question belonged to
a far more important personage in Rome than any princess, though that
personage was not even a living baby, but only a doll. It was the coach
of the famous Bambino -- Il Santissimo Bambino -- which with its dress
of gold and silver tissue and its magnificent diamonds, emeralds and
rubies, is the chief attraction of this church.



[Sidenote: The Wealth and Power of the Miraculous Bambino.]

Dr. Alexander Robertson, in his book on The Roman Catholic Church in
Italy, says: "The Bambino is a doll about three feet high, and it
stands on a cushion in a glass case. It is clad in rich robes with
a crown on its head, a regal order across its breast, and embroidered
slippers on its feet. From head to foot it is one mass of dazzling
jewelry, gold chains, strings of pearls, and diamond bracelets and
rings, which not only cover the neck, arms and fingers, but are
suspended, intermixed with crosses, stars, hearts, monograms, and
every kind of precious stone, to all parts of its body. The only part
unweighted with gems is its round, priest-like, wax face. But all this
display of wealth, great in itself, is really only suggestive of that
untold quantity which it has brought, and is still daily bringing,
into the coffers of the church. People are continually kneeling before
this dumb idol, offering petitions and leaving gifts, whilst letters
containing requests, accompanied with post-office orders and checks to
pay for the granting of the same, arrive by post for it from various
parts of the globe."

Hare's Walks in Rome gives the following account of the Bambino and
one of its most remarkable experiences:

"It has servants of its own, and a carriage in which it drives
out with its attendants, and goes to visit the sick; for, though
an infant, it is the oldest medical practitioner in Rome. Devout
peasants always kneel as the blessed infant passes. Formerly it was
taken to sick persons and left on their beds for some hours, in the
hope that it would work a miracle. Now it is never left alone. In
explanation of this, it is said that an audacious woman formed the
design of appropriating to herself the holy image and its benefits.
She had another doll prepared of the same size and appearance as the
Santissimo, and having feigned sickness and obtained permission to have
it left with her, she dressed the false image in its clothes, and sent
it back to Ara Coeli. The fraud was not discovered till night, when the
Franciscan monks were awakened by the most furious ringing of bells
and by thundering knocks at the west door of the church, and hastening
thither, could see nothing but a wee naked pink foot peeping in from
under the door; but when they opened the door, without stood the little
naked figure of the true Bambino of Ara Coeli, shivering in the wind
and rain -- so the false baby was sent back in disgrace, and the real
baby restored to its home, never to be trusted away alone any more."

[Sidenote: The Communion Table Used by Christ.]

But if I dwell on all these interesting relics and images as I have
done on the Holy Cradle and the miraculous Bambino, I shall never
finish even the brief list of them which I had in mind when I began. I
must hasten on, contenting myself with a bare mention of a few of the
more notable relics at the other churches.

On the 8th of January we paid our first visit to the great Church of
St. John Lateran, and here also the relics interested us more than
anything else. Under the canopy in the centre the skulls of St. Peter
and St. Paul are preserved. Beneath the altar we saw the wooden table
on which the Apostle Peter is said to have "celebrated mass" in the
house of Pudens. The interest of this relic, however, is completely
eclipsed by that of another relic over an altar at a little distance
in the same church, viz: the cedar table used by our Lord and his
disciples in the Last Supper. This table is concealed behind a bronze
relief representing that solemn scene in the Upper Room at Jerusalem.

[Sidenote: Other Relics at St. John Lateran.]

"The Basilica claims to possess many valuable relics. Amongst these are
some portions of the manger in which Christ was cradled, the shirt and
seamless coat made for him by the Virgin; some of the barley loaves
and small fishes miraculously multiplied to feed the five thousand;
the linen cloth with which he dried the feet of his apostles; also
Aaron's rod, the rod with which Moses smote the Red Sea," etc., etc.
(Cook's Southern Italy, p. 114.) We did not see these, but in the
cloister behind this church we were shown a marble slab on pillars
which was once an altar, "at which the officiating priest doubted of
the Real Presence, when the wafer fell from his hand through the stone,
leaving a round hole, which still remains." Here, too, we were shown
a larger slab resting on pillars, more than six feet from the ground,
which marks the height of our Saviour; also a porphyry slab, upon which
the soldiers cast lots for his seamless robe; and some columns from
Pilate's house in Jerusalem, which were rent by the earthquake of the
crucifixion.



[Sidenote: The Holy Stairs from Pilate's Palace.]

But the great relic of Pilate's House, and one of the most interesting
of all the relics in Rome, is across the street from St. John Lateran,
viz., the world-renowned Scala Santa, or Holy Stairway, a flight of
twenty-eight marble steps, once ascended by our Saviour in the palace
of Pilate, and brought from Jerusalem to Rome in 326 by the Empress
Helena, mother of Constantine the Great. They are covered with a wooden
casing, but holes have been left through which the marble steps can be
seen. Two of them are stained with the Saviour's blood. These spots
are covered with glass. The light was rather dim, and as we entered a
gentleman struck a match and held it over one of these glass-covered
stains to show it to his little girl, so that, passing just at that
moment, we also had a good view.

[Sidenote: The Man who Crawled Up and Walked Down.]

No foot is allowed to touch the Scala Santa; it must be ascended
on the knees. A number of people were going up in this way when
we entered, pausing on each step to repeat a prayer, for which
indulgences are granted by the Pope. There are stairways on each
side, by which those who have thus crawled up may walk down. The
only man I know of that ever walked down the Holy Stairs themselves,
and the most illustrious man that ever crawled up them on his knees,
was Martin Luther. When he had mounted slowly half way up, step by
step on his knees, he seemed to hear a voice saying, "The just shall
live by faith." Martin Luther rose from his knees, walked down the
staircase, and left the place a free man so far as this superstition
was concerned, and shortly afterwards became the most formidable foe
that ever assailed the falsehood and corruption of the Romish Church.

[Sidenote: The Miraculous Portrait and the Shoes of Christ.]

At the top of the Scala Santa we saw through a grating the beautiful
silver tabernacle containing the great relic which has given to this
chapel the name of Sancta Sanctorum, viz.: the portrait of Christ,
held by the Romish Church to be authentic, having been drawn in outline
by St. Luke and finished by an angel, whence its name "Acheiropoëton,"
i. e., the picture made without hands. The relic chamber here
contains fragments of the true cross, the sandals of Christ, and "the
iron bar of Hades which he brought away with him from that doleful
region," but we did not see these.

[Sidenote: The Inscription on the Cross, and the Finger of Thomas.]

A short walk beyond the Scala Santa and the Lateran brings us to the
Church of S. Croce in Gerusalemme, which is specially rich in relics.
Here our party was shown a piece of the true cross of Christ and the
original plank bearing the inscription, "Jesus, Nazarene King," in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, which was placed over his head; also one
of the nails used in his crucifixion, and two of the thorns of his
crown; besides a large piece of the cross of the penitent thief who was
executed with him; and, most interesting of all in some respects, the
finger used by Thomas to resolve his doubts as to the resurrection of
Christ (John xx. 24-28).

[Sidenote: A Bottle of The Blood of Christ.]

In Percy's Romanism it is said that "the list of relics on the right
of the apsis of S. Croce includes the finger of S. Thomas, apostle,
with which he touched the most holy side of our Lord Jesus Christ; one
of the pieces of money with which the Jews paid the treachery of Judas;
great part of the veil and of the hair of the most blessed Virgin; a
mass of cinders and charcoal united in the form of a loaf, with the fat
of S. Lawrence, martyr; one bottle of the most precious blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ; another of the milk of the most blessed Virgin; a
little piece of the stone where Christ was born; a little piece of the
stone where our Lord sat when he pardoned Mary Magdalene; of the stone
where our Lord wrote the law given to Moses on Mount Sinai; of the
stone where reposed SS. Peter and Paul; of the cotton which collected
the blood of Christ; of the manna which fed the Israelites; of the rod
of Aaron which flourished in the desert; of the relics of the eleven
prophets!" 

But our party saw none of these except the finger of Thomas. It is
to be hoped that the others have been withdrawn from exhibition, for
surely superstition and vulgarity can no further go. I fear, however,
that those who are willing to pay enough can still see "one bottle of
the most precious blood of our Lord Jesus Christ," and "another of the
milk of the most blessed Virgin"! There is also "una ampulla lactis
Beatae Mariae Virginis" among the many relics to be seen in the
Church of SS. Cosmo and Damiano, near the Forum.

[Sidenote: No Women Admitted.]

It is a curious illustration of Romish wrong-headedness that women
are never allowed to enter the Chapel of St. Helena, in the Church
of S. Croce, except on the festival of the Saint, August 18th,
notwithstanding the fact that St. Helena herself was a woman, and that
the church owes its existence to her and is also indebted to her for
the piece of the true cross which it boasts, and which has given it its
name. So while men are permitted to go inside the chapel of St. Helena,
women are stopped at the entrance and only allowed to peer through the
railing. The same degrading discrimination is made in the Church of S.
Prassede (who also was a woman) as to entering the splendid chapel,
Orto del Paradiso, which contains the column of blood jasper to which
Christ was bound, and which was "given by the Saracens to Giovanni
Colonna, cardinal of this church, and legate of the Crusade, because
when he had fallen into their hands and was about to be put to death,
he was rescued by a marvellous intervention of celestial light."
Females are never allowed to enter this chapel except upon Sundays in
Lent, but are permitted to look at the relic through a grating. 

[Sidenote: Four Other Stones of Great Interest.]

The mention of this column reminds me of the two columns in the Church
of S. Maria Transpontina, on the other side of the Tiber, near St.
Peter's, which bear inscriptions stating that they were the pillars to
which St. Peter and St. Paul were fastened, respectively, when they
suffered flagellation by order of Nero. A little farther on towards
St. Peter's is the Piazza Scossa Cavalli, with a pretty fountain.
"Its name bears witness to a curious legend, which tells how when S.
Helena returned from Palestine, bringing with her the stone on which
Abraham was about to sacrifice Isaac, and that on which the Virgin Mary
sat down at the time of the presentation of the Saviour in the temple,
the horses drawing these precious relics stood still at this spot,
and refused every effort to make them move. Then Christian people,
'recognizing the finger of God,' erected a church on this spot -- S.
Giacomo Scossa Cavalli -- where the stones are still to be seen."

[Sidenote: The Hardness of St. Peter's Knees.]

While speaking of interesting stones, I must not omit to mention those
in the Church of S. Francesca Romana, near the Forum, containing the
marks of the knees of St. Peter -- (which show, by the way, that this
apostle was a giant in size) -- when he knelt to pray that Simon Magus
might be dropped by the demons he had invoked to support him in the
air in fulfilment of his promise to fly. One of these stones used to
lie in the Via Sacra, and the water which collected in the two holes
or knee prints was looked upon as so potent a remedy of disease that
groups of infirm people used to gather around them on the approach of
a shower. According to the legend, the place where Peter knelt when
he thus effected the discomfiture of Simon Magus and brought him to
the ground with such force that his thigh was fractured, never to be
healed, was the ancient Via Sacra. But, after the priests had removed
the stone from the roadway into the church, the inconsiderate and
iconoclastic explorers of our day, who have made so many discoveries in
their excavations about the Forum, proved that the roadway from which
this relic was taken was not the ancient Via Sacra at all, but a more
modern roadway which had been mistaken for it!

[Sidenote: The Hardness of St. Peter's Head.]

In the Mamertine Prisons, which are also quite close to the Forum, a
depression on the stone wall by which we descend to the lower dungeon
is shown as the spot against which St. Peter's head rested, though our
guide had just told us that these stairs were not in existence then and
prisoners were let down into the dungeon through the hole in the middle
of the stone floor. Such trifling discrepancies do not seem to trouble
the average Italian mind.

St. Peter and St. Paul are said to have been bound in this prison for
nine months to a pillar, which is shown here. "A fountain of excellent
water beneath the floor of the prison is attributed to the prayers
of St. Peter, that he might have wherewith to baptize his gaolers,
Processus and Martinianus; but, unfortunately for this ecclesiastical
tradition, the fountain is described by Plutarch as having existed at
the time of Jugurtha's imprisonment" here, long before the time of St.
Peter.

Another miraculous spring, still flowing, is shown in the Church of SS.
Cosmo and Damiano as that which burst forth in answer to the prayers of
Felix IV., that he might have water to baptize his disciples.

[Sidenote: What the Head of St. Paul Did.]

But the most interesting of all the miraculous springs in or around
Rome are the three fountains, about two miles from the city, where the
Apostle Paul was executed. When his head was severed from his body it
bounded from the earth three times, crying out thrice, "Jesus! Jesus!
Jesus!" A fountain burst from the ground at each of the three spots
where the severed head struck. It is asserted, in proof of this origin
of the fountains, that the water of the first is still warm, of the
second tepid, and of the third cold, but we drank of them one after
another without being able to detect any difference in temperature. The
apostle's head is shown in bas relief upon the three altars above the
fountains. In the church which has been built over them we were shown
the pillar to which he was bound, and the block of marble upon which
he was decapitated, and, in the vault of another church hard by, the
prison in which he was placed just before his execution.

We could not help asking the priest who was our escort whether this
extraordinary story was still believed. His answer was: "Certainly!
There is no reason whatever to doubt it. The facts have been handed
down in an unbroken succession from eye-witnesses," a position which
he proceeded to defend at length and with great warmth when one of our
party in particular manifested much slowness to believe.

[Sidenote: St. Paul's Use of Plautilla's Veil.]

Furthermore, the opening of these three fountains was not the only
miracle wrought by the apostle after his death. Mrs. Jameson says:
"The legend of his death relates that a certain Roman matron named
Plautilla, one of the converts of S. Peter, placed herself on the road
by which S. Paul passed to his martyrdom, to behold him for the last
time; and when she saw him she wept greatly and besought his blessing.
The apostle then, seeing her faith, turned to her, and begged that she
would give him her veil to blind his eyes when he should be beheaded,
promising to return it to her after his death. The attendants mocked
at such a promise; but Plautilla, with a woman's faith and charity,
taking off her veil, presented it to him. After his martyrdom, S. Paul
appeared to her and restored the veil, stained with his blood. In the
ancient representations of the martyrdom of S. Paul, the legend of
Plautilla is seldom omitted. In the picture by Giotto in the Sacristy
of S. Peter's, Plautilla is seen on an eminence in the background,
receiving the veil from the hands of S. Paul, who appears in the
clouds above; the same representation, but little varied, is executed
in bas-relief on the bronze doors of St. Peter's."

[Sidenote: The Footprints of Christ in Stone.]

About two miles northeast of the Three Fountains, and the same distance
from the city, on the Appian Way, stands the Church of St. Sebastian.
Over an altar on the right, as you enter, the attendant priest, drawing
aside a curtain, shows you a slab of dark red stone with two enormous
footprints on it. These, we are told, were made by the feet of Christ
during an interview with Peter which took place near here, on the site
of the small Church of Domine Quo Vadis. The story is as follows: After
the burning of Rome, Nero charged the Christians with having fired
the city. Straightway the first persecution broke forth, and many of
the Christians were put to death with dreadful torture. The survivors
besought Peter not to expose his life. As he fled along the Appian Way,
Christ appeared to him travelling towards the city. The fleeing apostle
exclaimed in amazement, "Domine, quo vadis?" (Lord, whither goest
thou?), to which, with a look of mild sadness, the Saviour replied,
"Venio iterum crucifigi" (I come to be crucified a second time), then
vanished, whereupon the apostle, ashamed of his weakness, returned to
Rome, and shortly afterwards was crucified there himself.

[Sidenote: The Chains of St. Peter.]

Another relic of great interest connected with the same apostle is
shown in the Church of S. Pietro in Vincoli, in Rome, and indeed gives
the church its name. The church is not without interest for other
reasons. For instance, it possesses portions of the crosses of St.
Peter and St. Andrew, and we are told that the high altar covers the
remains of the seven Maccabean brothers. But the basilica is specially
famous for the possession of the greatest masterpiece of sculpture
since the time of the Greeks -- the majestic "Moses" of Michelangelo,
which draws thousands of sightseers who might otherwise never set foot
in the building. Nevertheless, its chief attraction, to the devout
Roman Catholic mind, is neither the bones of the Maccabees nor the
statue of Moses, but the chains referred to in the following familiar
passage of Scripture: "Peter therefore was kept in prison; but prayer
was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him. And when Herod
would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between
two soldiers bound with two chains; and the keepers before the door
kept the prison. And behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a
light shined in the prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and raised
him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his
hands." (Acts xii. 5-7.) These two chains were presented by Juvenal,
Bishop of Jerusalem, to the Empress Eudoxia, wife of Theodosius the
younger, who placed one of them in the Basilica of the apostles in
Constantinople and sent the other to Rome, where this church was
erected as its special shrine. This was about the middle of the fifth
century. "But the Romans could not rest satisfied with the possession
of half the relic; and within the walls of this very basilica, Leo
I. beheld in a vision the miraculous and mystical uniting of the two
chains, since which they have both been exhibited here, and the day of
their being soldered together by invisible power, August 1st, has been
kept sacred in the Latin church!" "They are of unequal size, owing to
many fragments of one of them (first whole links, then only filings)
having been removed in the course of centuries by various popes and
sent to Christian princes who have been esteemed worthy of the favor!
The longest is about five feet in length. At the end of one of them is
a collar, which is said to have encircled the neck of St. Peter. They
are exposed on the day of the 'station' (the first Monday in Lent) in a
reliquary presented by Pius IX., adorned with statuettes of St. Peter
and the Angel -- to whom he is represented as saying, 'Ecce nunc scio
vere' (Acts xii. II). On the following day a priest gives the chains
to be kissed by the pilgrims, and touches their foreheads with them,
saying, 'By the intercession of the blessed Apostle Peter, may God
preserve you from evil. Amen.'" 

[Sidenote: The Benefits of Buying a Fac-simile of the Chains.]

In the sacristy we found a young priest doing a thriving business in
copies of the relic. We bought from him "an iron fac-simile of the
chains (about the size of an ordinary watch-chain), authenticated by a
certificate testifying to its having touched the original chains. On
the back of this certificate was printed an extract from the Rules of
the Confraternity of the chains of St. Peter, from which we learned
that all associates in this brotherhood must wear such a fac-simile
as we had just bought, that the objects of the Confraternity are "The
propagation of the veneration of the chains of St. Peter, an increase
of devotion to the Holy See, prayers for the Pope's intention, for the
needs of Holy Church, the conversion of infidels and sinners, and the
extirpation of heresy and blasphemy," and that Pius IX. had granted to
the members of the Confraternity various indulgences, one of which is
"A plenary indulgence and remission of all sins if one visits the
Church of San Pietro in Vincoli on January 18th and June 29th, 
between the first vespers of the feast and sunset of the said days,
or on August 1st, or any one of the seven days following it. The usual
prayers for the Holy Father's intention," etc., are comprised in these
visits. We are told also that "the foregoing indulgences are applicable
to the souls in purgatory."

[Sidenote: The Relics in St. Peter's Cathedral.]

We may close this running account of the relics at Rome with a brief
mention of those that are to be seen in St. Peter's itself, the largest
and costliest church in the world. The construction of it extended
over one hundred and seventy-six years. The cost of the main building
alone was fifty million dollars. The annual outlay for repairs is
thirty-one thousand five hundred dollars. But it cost the Romish Church
far more than money -- it cost her the loss of all the leading nations
of the world, which had been under her dominion till that time. For
the expense of the vast structure, with its "insolent opulence of
marbles," was so great that Julius II. and Leo X. were obliged to meet
the enormous outlay by the sale of indulgences, and that, as is well
known, precipitated the Reformation. So that Protestants may well feel
a peculiar interest in this mighty cathedral.

[Sidenote: The Column against which Christ Leaned in the Temple.]

It goes without saying that the popes would not allow the chief church
of Roman Catholicism to go begging in the matter of relics. And, sure
enough, we have no sooner pushed aside the heavy padded screen and
stepped within than we find on our right the Chapel of the Holy Column,
so called because it contains a pillar which is declared to have been
that against which our Lord leaned when he prayed and taught in the
temple at Jerusalem. The pillar contains this inscription: "Haec est
illa columna in qua DNS N{r} Jesus XPS appodiatus dum populo prædicabat
et Deo pno preces in templo effundebat adhaerendo, stabatque una
cum aliis undecim hic circumstantibus. De Salomonis templo in
triumphum hujus Basilicæ hic locata fuit: demones expellit et immundis
spiritibus vexatos liberos reddit et multa miracula cotidie facit.
P. reverendissimum prem et Dominum Dominum Card. de Ursinis. A. D.
MDCCCXXVIII."

[Sidenote: The Chair of St. Peter.]

At the other end of the church we are shown an ancient wooden chair,
encrusted with ivory, which we are told was the Cathedra Petri,
the episcopal throne of St. Peter and his immediate successors.
A magnificent festival in honor of this chair has been annually
celebrated here for hundreds of years.

My party seems to be made up of very determined Protestants. At any
rate, the sight of this relic leads an inquisitive person in the party
to ask whether the Bible does not say that "Peter's wife's mother lay
sick of a fever."

"Yes," replies the unfortunate gentleman to whose lot it falls to
answer all questions of all kinds.

"Then," continues the Inquisitive Person, "Peter was married?"

Unfortunate Gentleman: "Yes."

I. P.: "Do the Popes still marry?"

U. G.: "No."

I. P.: "If 'the first Pope' was married, why should not his successors
be married, and why should they insist upon a celibate clergy in every
age, in every country, and under all circumstances?"

[Sidenote: The Bones of St. Peter.]

U. G.: "These questions are becoming too hard for me. Come, let me
show you the tomb which contains the bones of St. Peter and St. Paul.
Only half of their bodies are preserved here, the other portion of St.
Peter's being in the Church of St. John Lateran and the other portion
of St. Paul's at the magnificent basilica of St. Paul's without the
walls."

"A circle of eighty-six gold lamps is always burning around the tomb of
the poor fisherman of Galilee.... Hence one can gaze up into the dome,
with its huge letters in purple-blue mosaic upon a gold ground (each
six feet long) -- Tu es Petrus, et super hanc petram ædificabo ecclesiam
meam, et tibi dabo claves regni coelorum.' Above this are four colossal
mosaics of the Evangelists.... The pen of St. Luke is seven feet in
length."

But we must not permit ourselves to be diverted from our proper subject
by the vastness and splendor of the building, natural as it is to do
so when standing under this matchless dome. The four huge piers which
support the dome are used as shrines for the four great relics of the
church, viz.: 1. The lance of St. Longinus, the soldier who pierced the
Saviour's side; 2. A portion of the true cross; 3. The napkin of St.
Veronica, containing the miraculous impression of our Lord's face; and
4. The head of the apostle Andrew.

I did not see these relics myself, as I was in the East when they were
exhibited, but on April 11th, the day before Easter, other members of
my party did, that is, they saw all of them but Andrew's head, and
from a letter written me by the youngest of my correspondents in my
own family, giving not only description, but drawings of the spear
head, the cross and the handkerchief in their several frames, I infer
that, notwithstanding the great height of the Veronica balcony from
which they are exhibited, my young correspondent and his companions
fared better in the matter of a good view than Fritz in Chronicles
of the Schönberg Cotta Family, who says: "To-day we gazed on the
Veronica -- the holy impression left by our Saviour's face on the cloth
S. Veronica presented to him to wipe his brow, bowed under the weight
of the cross. We had looked forward to this sight for days, for seven
thousand years of indulgence from penance are attached to it. But when
the moment came we could see nothing but a black board hung with a
cloth, before which another white cloth was held. In a few minutes this
was withdrawn, and the great moment was over, the glimpse of the sacred
thing on which hung the fate of seven thousand years."




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE LEGENDS, THE POPES, AND THE PASQUINADES.


[Sidenote: The Manufacture of St. Philomena.]

Before quitting the subject of the relics at Rome, I must give my
readers what Hare calls "the extraordinary history of the manufacture
of S. Filomena, now one of the most popular saints in Italy, and one
towards whom idolatry is carried out with frantic enthusiasm both at
Domo d'Ossola and in some of the Neapolitan States."

"In the year 1802, while some excavations were going forward in the
Catacombs of Priscilla, a sepulchre was discovered containing the
skeleton of a young female; on the exterior were rudely painted some
of the symbols constantly recurring in these chambers of the dead -- an
anchor, an olive branch (emblems of Hope and Peace), a scourge, two
arrows, and a javelin; above them the following inscription, of which
the beginning and end were destroyed:

 -- "LUMENA PAX TE CUM FI" -- 

The remains, reasonably supposed to be those of one of the early
martyrs for the faith, were sealed up and deposited in the treasury
of relics in the Lateran; here they remained for some years unthought
of. On the return of Pius VII. from France, a Neapolitan prelate was
sent to congratulate him. One of the priests in his train, who wished
to create a sensation in his district, where the long residence of the
French had probably caused some decay of piety, begged for a few relics
to carry home, and these recently discovered remains were bestowed on
him; the inscription was translated somewhat freely to signify Santa
Philomena, rest in peace. Another priest, whose name is suppressed,
because of his great humility, was favored by a vision in the broad
noonday, in which he beheld the glorious virgin Filomena, who was
pleased to reveal to him that she had suffered death for preferring
the Christian faith and her vow of chastity to the addresses of the
emperor, who wished to make her his wife. This vision leaving much
of her history obscure, a certain young artist, whose name is also
suppressed, perhaps because of his great humility, was informed in a
vision that the emperor alluded to was Diocletian, and at the same
time the torments and persecutions suffered by the Christian virgin
Filomena, as well as her wonderful constancy, were also revealed to
him. There were some difficulties in the way of the Emperor Diocletian,
which incline the writer of the historical account to incline
to the opinion that the young artist in his wisdom may have made
a mistake, and that the emperor may have been not Diocletian, but
Maximian. The facts, however, now admitted of no doubt; the relics
were carried by the priest Francesco da Lucia to Naples; they were
enclosed in a case of wood resembling in form the human body; this
figure was habited in a petticoat of white satin, and over it a crimson
tunic after the Greek fashion; the face was painted to represent
nature, a garland of flowers was placed on the head, and in the hands
a lily and a javelin with the point reversed, to express her purity
and her martyrdom; then she was laid in a half-sitting posture in a
sarcophagus, of which the sides were glass, and, after lying for some
time in state in the chapel of the Torres family in the Church of Sant'
Angiolo, she was carried in grand procession to Mugnano, a little town
about twenty miles from Naples, amid the acclamations of the people,
working many and surprising miracles by the way.... Such is the legend
of S. Filomena, and such the authority on which she has become within
the last twenty years one of the most popular saints in Italy." -- Mrs.
Jameson's Sacred and Legendary Art, p. 671.

But, after all, the most extraordinary case of saint-manufacture is
not that of Philomena, but that of Buddha! I have not room for the
story here, but if any one wishes to know how the papacy made Buddha a
Christian saint, he will find the whole story, with the proofs, in A
History of the Warfare of Science and Theology, by Andrew D. White,
LL. D., late President and Professor of History at Cornell University,
and until recently United States Ambassador to Germany.

[Sidenote: "The Courteous Spaniard."]

A few days ago we visited the Church of St. Laurence Without the Walls,
where in a silver shrine under the high altar, the remains of St.
Laurence and St. Stephen are said to rest. The walls of the portico of
the church are covered with a series of frescoes, lately repainted. One
series represents the story of St. Stephen and that of the translation
of his relics to this church. "The relics of St. Stephen were preserved
at Constantinople, whither they had been transported from Jerusalem by
the Empress Eudoxia, wife of Theodosius II. Hearing that her daughter,
Eudoxia, wife of Valentinian II., Emperor of the West, was afflicted
with a devil, she begged her to come to Constantinople, that her demon
might be driven out by the touch of the relics. The younger Eudoxia
wished to comply, but the devil refused to leave her unless St. Stephen
was brought to Rome. An agreement was therefore made that the relics
of St. Stephen should be exchanged for those of St. Laurence. St.
Stephen arrived, and the Empress was immediately relieved of her devil;
but when the persons who had brought the relics of St. Stephen from
Constantinople were about to take those of St. Laurence back with them,
they all fell down dead! Pope Pelagius prayed for their restoration
to life, which was granted for a short time, to prove the efficacy of
prayer, but they all died again ten days later! Thus the Romans knew
that it would be criminal to fulfil their promise, and part with the
relics of St. Laurence, and the bodies of the two martyrs were laid in
the same sarcophagus." And thus we know how much more the Romans think
of relics than of honor and truth. "It is related that when they opened
the sarcophagus, and lowered into it the body of St. Stephen, St.
Laurence moved on one side, giving the place of honor on the right hand
to St. Stephen; hence, the common people of Rome have conferred on St.
Laurence the title of 'Il cortese Spagnuolo' -- the courteous Spaniard."

Another series of these pictures in the portico represents the story
of a sacristan who, coming to pray in this church before day, found it
filled with worshippers, and was told by St. Laurence himself that they
were the Apostle Peter, the first martyr, Stephen, and other apostles,
martyrs and virgins from paradise, and was ordered to go and tell the
Pope what he had seen, and bid him come and celebrate a solemn mass.
The sacristan objected that the Pope would not believe him, and asked
for some visible sign. Then St. Laurence ungirt his robe and gave him
his girdle. When the Pope was accompanying him back to the basilica
they met a funeral procession. To test the powers of the girdle, the
Pope laid it on the bier, and at once the dead arose and walked.

[Sidenote: The Miracles of St. Dominic.]

That is not the only miracle of resurrection offered to our credulity
by these ecclesiastical legends. The three principal frescoes in the
chapter house of the church of St. Sisto, recently painted by the
Padre Besson, represent three miracles of St. Dominic -- in each case of
raising from the dead -- the subjects being a mason who had fallen from
a scaffold when building this monastery, a child, and the young Lord
Napoleone Orsini, who had been thrown from his horse and instantly
killed, and who was brought to life by St. Dominic on this spot, as
is further commemorated by an inscription on the wall. But miracles
were nothing uncommon in the history of the founder of the powerful
Dominican Order. In the refectory of St. Marco, at Florence, we had
seen the fine fresco which represents the miraculous provision made
for him and his forty friars at a time of scarcity by two angels. The
refectory in which this miracle took place is at the Church of St.
Sabina, on the Aventine, in Rome; but there are three other things at
this church which interested us hardly less than the scene of that
miracle. One of them is the huge, pumpkin-shaped, black stone, two or
three times as big as a man's head, which the devil is said to have
hurled at St. Dominic one day when he found him lying prostrate in
prayer. This stone is the most conspicuous object in the church, being
set up on a pillar about three feet high, right in the middle of the
nave. Not far away is the marble slab on which the saint was lying at
the time that the formidable missile was thrown. The adversary's aim
was not good, and the saint was not harmed. The second thing of chief
interest here is the Chapel of the Rosary, at the other end of the same
aisle in which the marble slab lies, built on the very spot where St.
Dominic had the vision in which he received the rosary from the hands
of the Virgin. The supernatural gift is commemorated in a beautiful
painting by Sassoferato. It is hardly necessary to explain to any of my
readers that a rosary is a string of beads used by Roman Catholics to
keep the count of the number of Pater-nosters and Ave-Marias which
they repeat, and that this manner of "vain repetitions" was first used
by the Dominicans among Roman Catholics, though the custom was really
borrowed from the Mohammedans and Brahmins, who still use rosaries. The
third object is the famous orange tree, now six hundred and seventy
years old, which is said to have been brought from Spain and planted
in the court here by St. Dominic himself, orange trees having been
unknown in Rome before that time, and "which still lives, and is firmly
believed to flourish or fail with the fortunes of the Dominican Order."
Ladies are not allowed to approach this tree, so, as there were ladies
in our party, we all contented ourselves with a look at it through a
window. Hard by, of course, there is a room where things are sold to
pilgrims and visitors. There we bought a rosary, the beads of which
are made of the fruit of the plant called the Thorn of Christ, with
the exception of the bead next to the cross, which is a tiny dried
orange from St. Dominic's tree. Enclosed in the cross are a little
piece of the wood of the tree, and some earth from the catacombs where
the bodies of Sts. Peter and Paul, and of the holy virgin martyrs,
Sts. Agnes and Cecilia, reposed for some time. The printed leaflet
which accompanies our purchase tells us that "these rosaries, when
sold or ordered, are blessed and enriched with the indulgences of the
Rosary Confraternity and the papal blessing. When blessed they may be
distributed; but if resold they lose all the indulgences." (Italics
ours.)

Still another relic of great interest in this convent of St. Sabina
is the crucifix of Michele Ghislieri (afterwards Pope Pius V.). "One
day, as Ghislieri was about to kiss his crucifix, in the eagerness
of prayer, the image of Christ, says the legend, retired of its own
accord from his touch, for it had been poisoned by an enemy, and a kiss
would have been death."

[Sidenote: Sundry Miracles by Other Saints, and Images.]

In the Church of St. Gregory, on the C[oe]lian Hill, the thing that
interested us most was the picture by Badalocchi, "commemorating a
miracle on this spot, when, at the moment of elevation, the Host
is said to have bled in the hands of St. Gregory, to convince an
unbeliever of the truth of transubstantiation." This is the same
Gregory who presented certain foreign ambassadors with a handful of
earth from the arena of the Coliseum as a relic for their sovereigns,
so many martyrs having suffered death there, and "upon their receiving
the gift with disrespect, he pressed it, when blood flowed from the
soil."

Not far from the Church of St. Gregory we were shown the hermitage
where St. Giovanni de Matha lived. "Before he came to reside here he
had been miraculously brought from Tunis (whither he had gone on a
mission) to Ostia, in a boat without helm or sail, in which he knelt
without ceasing before the crucifix throughout the whole of his voyage!"

Time would fail me to tell of the miraculous surgical operation
performed by Sts. Cosmo and Damian upon a man who was praying in the
church dedicated to them, and who had a diseased leg amputated without
pain by the good saints while he slept; and not only so, but had a
sound leg, which they had taken from the body of a man just buried,
substituted for the diseased one. Nor can I dwell on the miraculous
blindness with which the guard sent to seize Pope St. Martin I. was
stricken the moment he caught sight of the pontiff in St. Maria
Maggiore, or the miraculous tears shed by an image of the Virgin
attached to a neighboring wall when she saw a cruel murder committed in
the street below, or the madonnas and crucifixes that spoke to saints
on various occasions. One of these, however, is too significant to be
omitted altogether. There is in the Church of St. Agostino a sculptured
image of the Madonna and child. "It is not long since the report was
spread that one day a poor woman called upon this image of the Madonna
for help; it began to speak, and replied, 'If I had only something,
then I could help thee, but I myself am so poor!' This story was
circulated, and very soon throngs of credulous people hastened hither
to kiss the foot of the Madonna, and to present her with all kinds of
gifts." (Italics mine.)

[Sidenote: How the Papal Treasury was Filled, and how it was Emptied.]

The evil methods employed at various times to replenish the papal
treasury are known to all readers of history. The best known, perhaps,
is the shameless traffic in indulgences by Tetzel, which helped to
precipitate the Reformation. Hare closes his account of the execution
of Beatrice Cenci for complicity in the murder of her father with the
statement that "sympathy will always follow one who sinned under the
most terrible of provocations, and whose cruel death was due to the
avarice of Clement VIII. for the riches which the church acquired by
the confiscation of the Cenci property," and cites the petition of
Gaspare Guizza (1601), in which he claims a reward from the Pope for
his service in apprehending one of the assassins of Francesco Cenci,
on the ground that thus "the other accomplices and their confessions
were secured, and so many thousands of crowns brought into the
papal treasury." The venality of Pope Alexander VI., Rodrigo Borgia
(1492-1503), "the wicked and avaricious father of Cæsar and Lucretia,
who is believed to have died of the poison which he intended for one
of his cardinals," is thus hit off by Pasquino:

 "Vendit Alexander claves, altaria, Christum;
 Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest."

Of Innocent X. (1644-'55), Pasquino says, "Magis amat Olympiam quam
Olympium," referring to the shameful relations existing between this
Pope and his avaricious sister-in-law, Olympia Maidalchini, who made
it her business to secure the profits of the papacy in hard cash.
Trollope, in his Life of Olympia, says: "No appointment to office of
any kind was made except in consideration of a proportionable sum paid
down into her own coffers. This often amounted to three or four years'
revenue of the place to be granted. Bishoprics and benefices were sold
as fast as they became vacant. One story is told of an unlucky disciple
of Simon, who in treating with the Pope for a valuable see, just fallen
vacant, and hearing from her a price at which it might be his, far
exceeding all he could command, persuaded the members of his family to
sell all they had for the purpose of making this profitable investment.
The price was paid, and the bishopric was given him, but, with a
fearful resemblance to the case of Ananias, he died within the year,
and his ruined family saw the see a second time sold by the insatiable
and incorrigible Olympia.... During the last year of Innocent's life,
Olympia literally hardly ever quitted him. Once a week, we read, she
left the Vatican, secretly by night, accompanied by several porters
carrying sacks of coins, the proceeds of the week's extortions and
sales, to her own palace. And during these short absences she used to
lock the Pope into his chamber, and take the key with her!" She finally
"deserted him on his death-bed, making off with the accumulated spoils
of his ten years' papacy, which enabled her son, Don Camillo, to build
the Palazzo Doria Pamfili, in the Corso, and the beautiful Villa Doria
Pamfili," west of the Janiculan Hill. This villa, with its casino,
garden, lake, fountain, pine-shaded lawns and woods, and its fine view
of St. Peter's standing out against the green Campagna beyond, and
the blue Sabine mountains in the distance, is to this day one of the
loveliest villas in Italy, and the favorite resort of the latter-day
Romans and visitors to their city on the two afternoons of the week on
which it is open to pedestrians and two-horse carriages.

The notorious Simony practiced by the popes, in which, as we have just
seen, Olympia became such an adept, gave rise to the biting Latin
couplet -- 

 "An Petrus Romæ fuerit, sub judice lis est;
 Simonem Romæ nemo fuisse negat."

Some of the modern methods of making use of the Pope for purposes
of gain are less objectionable than those of Olympia. Dr. Alexander
Robertson, in his Roman Catholic Church in Italy, just published,
says: "One of the very latest novelties of the 'Pope's Shop' is a
penny-in-the-slot blessing machine. Specimens of this were lately to be
seen in the Corso, Rome, about half way between the Piazza Colonna and
the Piazza del Popolo. A penny is dropped into it. The cinematograph,
or wheel of life, goes round, when, lo! there appears a long procession
of richly clothed cardinals and monsignori, and then the Pope in a
sedan chair, accompanied by his Swiss Guards. As he is carried past
the spectator, he turns towards the window of his chair, a smile
overspreads his face, he raises his hands, and gives his blessing. On
these machines there is an inscription to the effect that the blessing
thus given and received is equivalent to that given by the Pope in
person in St. Peter's. Truly a novel way of turning an honest penny!"
We hear that a rash churchman, not liking the facts just stated,
undertook to deny them in the public prints, when up spoke some English
gentlemen, who had been in Rome recently, and bowled the churchman over
with the statement that they had themselves seen this blessing machine
on the Corso.

One never touches this subject of the vast wealth of the papacy without
calling to mind the well-known rejoinder of the great theologian,
Thomas Aquinas, when the Pope was showing him all his money and riches,
and said, "You see, Thomas, the church cannot now say what it said in
early times, 'Silver and gold have I none.'" "No," answered Aquinas,
"nor can it say, 'Rise up and walk'" (Acts iii. 6). This loss of
spiritual power, this loss of ability to minister salvation to others,
is one of the most melancholy results of the corruption of the papacy.

[Sidenote: Some Ugly Things in the Lives of the Popes.]

Dr. Alexander Robertson, in his recent book on The Roman Catholic
Church in Italy, which has received the hearty approval of the King
of Italy and his Prime Minister, says: "There are few, I daresay,
who have looked into the history of the popes, no matter what their
religious faith may be, who will not agree with me when I say that it
does not afford pleasant reading. One's intellect rebels against their
preposterous claims and pretensions, and one's moral sense against
their character and lives. Amongst them there were some good men, some
learned men, and some really able men; but, taking them all in all,
they were, beyond doubt, amongst the lowest class of men to be found
on the pages of history. To wade through their lives is to cross a
pestiferous moral swamp of worldliness, simony, nepotism, concubinage,
personal animosities, sanguinary feuds, forged decretals, plunderings,
poisonings, assassinations, massacres, death." 

One may smile at such papal peccadilloes as the vanity of Paul II.,
who was chiefly remarkable for his personal beauty, and was so vain
of his appearance that, when he was elected Pope, he wished to take
the name of Formosus. One may be amused at the intense self-esteem of
Urban VIII., of whose spoliation of ancient Rome Pasquino says, "Quod
non fecerunt barbari, fecerunt Barberini," and who, in the Barberini
palace, had the Virgin and angels represented as bringing in the
ornaments of the papacy at his coronation, and in another room a number
of the Barberini bees (the family crest) flocking against the sun, and
eclipsing it -- to symbolize the splendor of the family. But our feeling
changes when we read that "he issued a bull by which the name, estates
and privileges of his house might pass to any living male descendant,
legitimate or illegitimate, whether child of prince or priest," lest
the family of Barberini might become absorbed in that of Colonna. And
we do not go far in our reading about such popes before the feeling of
amusement yields to one of sadness, indignation and horror. We need
not insist upon the story of the female Pope Joan, who is said to have
secured her election to the papal throne disguised as a man, and to
have reigned two years as John VIII., and then to have died a shameful
death; for, notwithstanding the indisputable fact that till 1600 her
head was included among the terra cotta representations of the other
popes in the Cathedral of Sienna, and was inscribed "Johannes VIII.,
Femina de Anglia," and that it was then changed into a head of Pope
Zacharias by the Grand Duke, at the request of Pope Clement VIII.,
the story is now generally discredited. But there are many other
facts, established beyond controversy, which explain fully the feeling
of the great majority of the Italian people and the verdict of the
accredited historians of the world. When the penitential Pope, Adrian
VI. (1522-'23), died of drinking too much beer, "the house of his
physician was hung with garlands by midnight revellers, and decorated
with the inscription, Liberatori Patriæ, S. P. Q. R.'" The nepotism of
the learned, brilliant and witty Paul III. "induced him to form Parma
into a duchy for his natural son Pierluigui, to build the Farnese
Palace, and to marry his grandson Ottavio to Marguerite, natural
daughter of Charles V." John XII., the first Pope who took a new name,
"scandalized Christendom by a life of murder, robbery, adultery and
incest." Of the tombs of the eighty-seven popes who were buried in the
old basilica of St. Peter's, only two were replaced when the present
building was erected, those of the two popes who lived in the time and
excited the indignation of Savonarola -- "Sixtus IV., with whose cordial
concurrence the assassination of Lorenzo de' Medici was attempted,
and Innocent VIII., the main object of whose policy was to secure
place and power for his illegitimate children," sixteen in number, and
who is represented on his tomb as holding in his hand the spear of
"St. Longinus," which had pierced the side of Christ. This spear was
sent to Innocent VIII. by the Sultan Bajazet, nearly fifteen hundred
years after the crucifixion, and, as we have already seen, is now
preserved in St. Peter's as one of its four chief relics. Guicciardini
says of the death of Alexander VI.: "All Rome ran with indescribable
gladness to visit the corpse. Men could not satiate their eyes with
feeding on the carcase of the serpent who, by his unbounded ambition
and pestiferous perfidy, by every demonstration of horrible cruelty,
monstrous lust and unheard-of avarice, selling without distinction
things sacred and profane, had filled the world with venom."

"Pope Paul V. granted dispensations and pensions to any persons who
would assassinate Fra Paolo Sarpi; Pope Pius V. offered, as Mr. Froude
tells us, 'remission of sin to them and their heirs, with annuities,
honors and promotions, to any cook, brewer, baker, vintner, physician,
grocer, surgeon, or others,' who would make away with Queen Elizabeth;
and Pope Gregory XIII. offered a high place in heaven to any one who
would murder the Prince of Orange; and the poor wretch, Balthazar
Gerard, who did the infamous deed, actually told his judges 'that he
would soon be a saint in heaven, and would have the first place there
next to God,' whilst his family received a patent of nobility, and
entered into the possession of the estate of the Prince in the Franche
Comté -- rewards promised for the commission of the crime by Cardinal
Granvelle." (Dr. Alexander Robertson's Roman Catholic Church in
Italy, p. 94.)

These are some of the things that help to explain not only the tone
of the pasquinades, not only the indictments of the world's leading
historians, which are to be presently cited, but also the present
attitude of something like twenty millions of the thirty-odd millions
of Italy's inhabitants, who have forsaken the church altogether.

What idea the people have of the Jesuits in particular is well shown
by the legend connected with the Piazza del Gesu, the great open space
in front of the Jesuit church, which is considered the windiest place
in Rome. The story is that the devil and the wind were one day taking a
walk together. "When they came to this square, the devil, who seemed to
be very devout, said to the wind, 'Just wait a minute, mio caro, while
I go into this church.' So the wind promised, and the devil went into
the Gesu, and has never come out again -- and the wind is blowing about
in the Piazza del Gesu to this day."

[Sidenote: Pasquino's View of the Pope.]

One of the interesting objects in Rome is a mutilated statue called
Pasquino, which stands at the corner of the Orsini Palace, one of
the most central and public places in the city. The reason for the
interest attaching to this almost shapeless piece of marble is that
for centuries it was used for placarding those satires upon the popes
which, by their exceeding cleverness and biting truth, have made the
name of pasquinade famous the world over. No squib that was ever
affixed to that column had a keener edge than the one known as "The
Antithesis of Christ," which appeared at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, and runs as follows:

 Christ said, "My kingdom is not of this world."
 The Pope conquers cities by force.

 Christ had a crown of thorns:
 The Pope wears a triple diadem.

 Christ washed the feet of his disciples:
 The Pope has his kissed by kings.

 Christ paid tribute:
 The Pope takes it.

 Christ fed the sheep:
 The Pope wishes to be master of the world.


 Christ carried on his shoulders the cross:
 The Pope is carried on the shoulders of his servants in liveries
 of gold.

 Christ despised riches:
 The Pope has no other passion than for gold.

 Christ drove out the merchants from the temple:
 The Pope welcomes them.

 Christ preached peace:
 The Pope is the torch of war.

 Christ was meekness:
 The Pope is pride personified.

 Christ promulgated the laws that the Pope tramples under foot.

[Sidenote: What the Italians now Think about it.]

"But," some one may say, "the pasquinades were written long ago, and,
while they are doubtless true descriptions of the papacy of the past,
surely no one would take the same view now." For answer I may quote
the statement of Dr. Raffaelle Mariano, Professor of Philosophy in the
University of Naples, who is not a Protestant, but, as he tells us, was
"born in the Roman Catholic Church," and was "a fervent Catholic from
infancy." Speaking of the vast difference which he found between the
teachings of the church and those of the New Testament as to what is
necessary to salvation, he says, "Therefore, Roman Catholicism is not
only not Christianity, but it is the very antithesis of Christianity,"
a statement every whit as strong as Pasquino's. Some American
Protestants, especially those who have personal friends in the Roman
Catholic Church whom they honor and love -- and there are many people in
that church who are richly worthy of honor and love, and who do not
approve of the evils we have been describing any more than we do -- are
sometimes disposed to think that Protestant writers are too severe in
their condemnation of the Romish Church as a system. A visit to Italy,
the centre of Romanism, would quickly disabuse these overcharitable
Protestants of that impression. We have all read of such things as
are described above in connection with the relics and legends, but
they seem far away and unreal, and almost impossible, until we come
to the home of Romanism and find them all around us. Then it ceases
to surprise us that so large a proportion of the most intelligent men
in Italy occupy a position of indifference and unbelief, or hostility
and scorn, towards the Christian religion, for Romanism is the only
Christianity that most of them know. Let it be remembered, too, that
the King, able, conscientious, patriotic, devoted to the welfare of
his people, and the Prime Minister, Zanardelli, like his predecessor,
Crispi, and the members of Parliament, and the army and navy, and the
whole government which has given Italy such wonderful stability and
prosperity since the overthrow of the papal dominion and opened before
the nation a future of so much promise, are all standing aloof from
the Pope. Let any one see one of the great pilgrimages from every
part of the country to the tomb of Victor Emmanuel, who freed Italy,
as we saw it the other day, and observe the immense popularity of the
great liberator and his successors of the house of Savoy, and let him
note the firm opposition of Italy's leading men to the papacy, and he
will see that the view of the Pope which the secular newspapers so
persistently seek to force upon the people of the English-speaking
world simply cannot be that of the thoughtful men of Italy.

By the way, I see plenty of women confessing to the priests, but
very, very few men. The textbook used in the training of priests
as father-confessors, and the standard work of the church on that
subject, approved by Pope Leo XIII., is Liguori's Moral Philosophy.
"On July 14, 1901, the Asino, a daily newspaper published in Rome,
printed in its columns, and also in the form of large bills, which it
caused to be posted up in public places in the chief cities of Italy, a
challenge offering one thousand francs to any Roman Catholic newspaper
which would have the courage to print the Latin text, with an Italian
translation, of two passages in Liguori's book, which it specified.
The challenge was never taken up, and it never will be, for any one
daring to publish the passages named would certainly be prosecuted for
outraging public decency" (Dr. Alexander Robertson, Roman Catholic
Church in Italy, p. 149). Hare says, "It was a curious characteristic
of the laxity of morals in the time of Julius II. (1503-'13), that her
friends did not hesitate to bury the famous Aspasia of that age in
this church (St. Gregorio), and to inscribe upon her tomb: 'Imperia,
cortisana Romana, quæ digna tanto nomine, raræ inter homines formæ
specimen dedit.'... But this monument has now been removed." 

Most of the facts above cited, especially those concerning the legends
and the Popes, except where specific acknowledgment is made to other
writers, have been drawn from Hare's invaluable Walks in Rome. Let us
conclude the list with the testimonies of a few eminent men of
unimpeachable competence and veracity as to the character and influence
of the Roman Catholic Church as a system.

[Sidenote: Macaulay, Dickens and Gladstone on the Influence of
Romanism.]

In the first chapter of his History of England, Lord Macaulay says:
"From the time when the barbarians overran the Western Empire to the
time of the revival of letters, the influence of the Church of Rome
had been generally favorable to science, to civilization, to good
government. But during the last three centuries, to stunt the growth
of the human mind has been her chief object. Throughout Christendom,
whatever advance has been made in knowledge, in freedom, in wealth,
and in the arts of life, has been made in spite of her, and has
everywhere been in inverse proportion to her power. The loveliest and
most fertile provinces of Europe have, under her rule, been sunk in
poverty, in political servitude, and in intellectual torpor, while
Protestant countries, once proverbial for sterility and barbarism,
have been turned by skill and industry into gardens, and can boast of
a long list of heroes and statesmen, philosophers and poets. Whoever,
knowing what Italy and Scotland naturally are, and what, four hundred
years ago, they actually were, shall now compare the country round Rome
with the country round Edinburgh, will be able to form some judgment
as to the tendency of papal domination. The descent of Spain, once
the first among the monarchies, to the lowest depths of degradation,
the elevation of Holland, in spite of many natural disadvantages, to
a position such as no commonwealth so small has ever reached, teach
the same lesson. Whoever passes in Germany from a Roman Catholic to
a Protestant principality, in Switzerland from a Roman Catholic to a
Protestant canton, in Ireland from a Roman Catholic to a Protestant
county, finds that he has passed from a lower to a higher grade of
civilization. On the other side of the Atlantic the same law prevails.
The Protestants of the United States have left far behind them the
Roman Catholics of Mexico, Peru and Brazil. The Roman Catholics of
Lower Canada remain inert, while the whole continent round them is
in a ferment with Protestant activity and enterprise. The French
have doubtless shown an energy and intelligence which, even when
misdirected, have justly entitled them to be called a great people.
But this apparent exception, when examined, will be found to confirm
the rule, for in no country that is called Roman Catholic has the
Roman Catholic Church, during several generations, possessed so little
authority as in France."

Charles Dickens, in a letter written from Switzerland, in 1845, to
his friend and biographer, Forster, says: "In the Simplon, hard
by here, where (at the bridge of St. Maurice over the Rhone) the
Protestant canton ends and a Catholic canton begins, you might
separate two perfectly distinct and different conditions of humanity
by drawing a line with your stick in the dust on the ground. On the
Protestant side -- neatness, cheerfulness, industry, education, continued
aspiration, at least, after better things. On the Catholic side -- dirt,
disease, ignorance, squalor and misery. I have so constantly observed
the like of this since I came abroad that I have a sad misgiving that
the religion of Ireland lies at the root of all its sorrows." Writing
from Genoa, in 1846, Dickens says, "If I were a Swiss, with a hundred
thousand pounds, I would be as steady against the Catholic canons and
the propagation of Jesuitism as any Radical among them; believing the
dissemination of Catholicity to be the most horrible means of political
and social degradation left in the world."

In connection with Dickens' remark about Ireland, we may quote the
remarkable statement of Mr. Michael McCarthy, himself a Roman Catholic,
in his book, Five Years in Ireland, pp. 65 and 66, where, after
describing the welcome of the Belfast Corporation to Lord Cadogan on
his first visit, in 1895, to the Protestant North of Ireland, and
their glowing statements about the peaceful and prosperous condition
of their city and district, he contrasts this happy condition with
the unhappy state of the "rest of Ireland," meaning by that the
Roman Catholic parts. "In the rest of Ireland there is no social or
industrial progress to record. The man who would say of it that it
was 'progressing and prospering,' or that 'its work people were fully
employed,' or that there existed 'a continued development of its
industries,' or that its towns 'had increased in value and population,'
would be set down as a madman. It is in this seven-eighths of Ireland
that the growing and great organization of the Catholic Church has
taken root."

Mr. Gladstone, in an article on "Italy and her Church," in the Church
Quarterly Review for October, 1875, says: "Profligacy, corruption and
ambition, continued for ages, unitedly and severally, their destructive
work upon the country, through the Curia and the papal chair; and in
doing it they of course have heavily tainted the faith of which that
chair was the guardian." Elsewhere he says, "There has never been any
more cunning blade devised against the freedom, the virtue and the
happiness of a people than Romanism."

Nathaniel Hawthorne, in his Marble Faun, which, by the way, contains
the most charming of all the descriptive writing about Rome, put
the case none too strongly when he spoke of being "disgusted with
the pretense of holiness and the reality of nastiness, each equally
omnipresent" in the city of the popes. The new government has wrought
a great change in this respect, and Rome is in many parts of it now
quite a clean city.

There, then, are the facts as to the influence of the Roman Catholic
Church. I am, of course, very far from saying that there are no good
people in that church. As I have already stated, I believe that there
are many good people in it, but my own observation has satisfied me
that the verdict of history as to the baleful influence of the system
is absolutely correct.

"What, then," some one may ask, "do the good people in that church
think of all the immoralities and frauds that it has condoned and
fostered?" The answer is that the really good people in that church
must grieve over them and deplore them just as the good people in other
churches do.

 

P. S. -- It is generally believed, and apparently with good reason,
that the new Pope, Pius X., is a better man than many of his
predecessors, and that he cannot be charged with the immoralities or
the ambition and avarice which characterized them. Let us hope that he
will have the courage to attempt some real reform in the lives of many
of his clergy.





CHAPTER XXXII.

THE OLD FORCES AND THE NEW IN THE ETERNAL CITY.


[Sidenote: An Audience with the Pope.]

Well, we have seen the Pope. Hearing that a body of Italian pilgrims
were to be received by the pontiff at the Vatican, and having assured
ourselves that the function was one which would involve no official
recognition of the Pope on our part, and that we should be merely
Protestant spectators, we gladly accepted the offer of tickets for the
audience, and, supposing in our simplicity that, as the reception was
set for noon, we should be sufficiently early if we went at eleven
o'clock, we drove up to the main entrance of the Vatican at that hour.
There was a great throng of people about the door, but our tickets
obtained for us immediate entrance along with a stream of other ladies
and gentlemen. The regulation attire for these functions is full
evening dress for gentlemen, while ladies wear black, with no hat, but
with a lace mantilla on the head. We first passed through a double line
of the famous Swiss Guards, in their extraordinary uniform of crimson,
yellow and black, designed by no less a person than Michael Angelo.
Then we were shown up the great stairway, and passing through a couple
of large rooms, one of which was adorned with Raphael's frescoes, we
found ourselves at the entrance of a long and spacious hall, already
densely crowded, as it seemed to us, but with a space kept open down
the centre between the rows of seats on either side. Looking down
this open space, we could see at the other end, on a slightly raised
platform, the pontifical throne, upholstered in red velvet, with
golden back and arms, effectively set in the midst of crimson hangings,
which swept in rich masses from the lofty ceiling to the floor.
Preceded by guards, we travelled the whole length of the hall, and
found, to our great gratification, that our seats were quite close to
the throne, so that we had an excellent position for seeing and hearing
all that was going on. We soon noticed that many of the hundreds of
people present, like some of us, had not observed the regulations as
to dress. Many others had. Mingled with the soberer attire of the
spectators, pilgrims and priests, we saw now and then a violet cassock,
as one bishop after another drifted in. Apart from these vestments,
there was no semblance of a religious gathering. It was more like a
social function, and the people were chatting gaily, the jolliest and
noisiest crowd being a group of young seminarians, prospective priests,
who occupied the same bench with us and the two or three nearest to
it. After we had been there an hour the great clock of St. Peter's
struck twelve. Instantly all the noisy young seminarians rose to their
feet and began to recite, in a lower, humming tone, their Ave-Marias
and Pater-Nosters. As soon as the reciting and counting of beads
was over, as it was in a minute, they struck in again with their gay
conversation. We had plenty of time to take it all in. The Pope is
always late, and it was an hour after the time fixed for the audience
when he appeared; but at last he did, and instantly everybody, men and
women, sprang up on the benches and chairs, frantically waving their
handkerchiefs and shouting at the top of their voices, "Evviva il
Papa-Re! Evviva il Papa-Re!" -- "Long live the Pope-King! Long live the
Pope-King!" -- the ablest performer in this part of the ceremony being a
leather-lunged young priest at my elbow, with a voice as powerful and
persistent as that of a hungry calf, and who made known his desire
for the restoration of the temporal power to the Pope with such energy
that the perspiration rolled down his fat face in shining rivulets.
I never heard anything like it except in a political convention or a
stock exchange. Accompanied by the Noble Guard, a body of picked men
renowned for their superb physique and clad in resplendent uniform, the
Holy Father was borne in on an arm-chair, carried by twelve men, also
in uniform. Occasionally he would rise to his feet with evident effort,
leaning on, or rather grasping, one arm of his chair, and bless the
people he was passing, with two fingers outstretched in the familiar
attitude that we have seen in the pictures. At such times the furious
acclamations, and waving of handkerchiefs, and clapping of hands,
would be redoubled. He passed within arm's length of us, a little knot
of Protestants, silent amid the uproar. It was a pitiful spectacle.
A pallid, feeble, tottering old man, with slender, shrunken neck,
and excessively sharp and prominent features, nose and chin almost
meeting -- we now understood Zola's description: "The simious ugliness of
his face, the largeness of his nose, the long slit of his mouth, the
hugeness of his ears, the conflicting jumble of his withered features."
But out of this waxen face peered a pair of brilliant dark eyes, the
only sign of real vitality about him. When he had been carefully
lowered by the chair-bearers, and had taken his throne on the platform,
with his attendants ranged round him, the spokesman of the pilgrims
came forward and read an address, to which the Pope's amanuensis,
standing by his side, read a brief reply. Then the Pope pronounced the
benediction in a surprisingly clear voice, after which the pilgrims
were introduced individually, not all of them, but a certain number of
representative persons among them. These all knelt and kissed his hand.
When this ceremony was over the audience closed, and the Pontiff was
borne out as he came in, amid wild applause.

[Sidenote: The Pope's Last Jubilee in St. Peter's.]

On the third of March, while I was in Egypt, our party in Rome saw a
much more imposing ceremony than the one I have just described. Every
one has noticed how numerous the papal jubilees have been during the
last quarter of a century, every year or so seeing the celebration of
some jubilee of the Pope's official life. In twenty-one years he has
had no less than fourteen of them. Their frequency should not surprise
us when we remember that each of them turns a vast stream of gifts and
money into the papal treasury from every part of the world. One of my
correspondents writes me that for the celebration of March 3rd both
sides of the nave of St. Peter's were lined with pens or boxes, all
free except those near the high altar, and in the middle of the nave
a passage about fifteen feet wide was railed off for the procession.
"We drove to St. Peter's through a pouring rain about 7:45 A. M. The
building was already packed with people. It is estimated that there
were fifty thousand of us by eleven o'clock. We walked down the left
aisle and took our position at the base of a pillar, where we could
see the Pope as he entered from the right aisle. There we waited from
eight o'clock till after eleven. He was an hour late. Finally, we heard
the silver trumpets sounding from the gallery in the dome. His guards
preceded him, and other attendants bearing swords, maces and a cross.
The caps indicating the offices he filled before he became Pope were
carried on cushions by three cardinals. He was himself carried on the
shoulders of twelve men, dressed in rich red costumes. The Pope sat in
his red and gold chair, richly robed in white satin embroidered with
gold. He wore a crown of the same materials, white silk mits, and a
large ring. When he entered the nave he stood and blessed the people,
holding up two fingers. The music was fine. We heard the singing as it
came nearer and nearer, but as soon as the Pope appeared the people
broke into shouts, waving handkerchiefs, and making so much noise that
we could no longer hear the music. We left after five hours."


ITALY, IN ROME.]

Later in the season those members of our party who remained in Rome
while we were travelling through Egypt and Palestine, had very
satisfactory views of King Edward VII. of England and William II.,
the Emperor of Germany, on their visits to Rome. As they had seen the
Prince of Wales in London, and young Prince Edward, who will also be
King of England some day if he lives, and the other royal children
at Marlborough House, and as they have repeatedly seen King Victor
Emmanuel and Queen Helena, they have had unusual opportunities for
seeing for themselves whether the royalties are made of common clay. I
must say for them that they are stauncher than ever in their devotion
to the republican ideals of our own country. Their opportunities for
seeing these royalties were better than those enjoyed by most visitors
to Rome, because their rooms overlooked the palace and grounds of the
Queen mother, Marguerita, and King Edward and the Kaiser, like other
royal visitors to Rome, made it their first business to call on her.
She is still the most beloved woman in Italy.

[Sidenote: Our Quarters on the Pincian Hill.]

The location of our rooms was advantageous in many other respects.
They were high up in the southwestern corner of a tall building on
the Pincian Hill, so high that we could look clear across the city
to the Sabine Mountains. As soon as the sun rose over the eastern
hills he looked cheerily into our windows, and continued his genial
companionship with us till he sank into the Mediterranean at night. We
had selected the rooms with a view to this particularly, remembering
the Italian proverb that "When the sun goes out of the window, the
doctor comes in at the door." A room on the north side of a building
should never be taken. The Roman winter is short but sharp. We could
see snow on the mountains during nearly the whole of our stay, which
in the case of the majority of us was five months. Then, too, we were
close to the city wall, and to the gate which led out into the lovely
Borghese Gardens, "whose wooded and flowery lawns are more beautiful
than the finest English park scenery," where "the stone pines lift
their dense clumps of branches upon a slender length of stem, so high
that they look like green islands in the air, flinging down a shadow
upon the turf so far off that you scarcely know which tree made it";
where there are "avenues of cypress, resembling dark flames of huge
funeral candles, which spread dusk and twilight round about them,
instead of cheerful radiance"; and where ancient and majestic ilex
trees "lean over the green turf in ponderous grace.... Never was
there a more venerable quietude than that which sleeps among their
sheltering boughs; never a sweeter sunshine than that which gladdens
the gentle gloom which these leafy patriarchs strive to diffuse over
the swelling and subsiding lawns." Moreover, our quarters were within
so short a walk of the park on the Pincio (where the band plays every
afternoon, and where all Rome drives round and round the little circle
at the top), and of the terrace of the Villa Medici, that we were
drawn thither day after day to watch the picturesque groups of models
lounging in the wintry sun on the great flight of steps that lead
from the Church of Trinita de' Monti down to the Piazza di Spagna,
to muse over the Eternal City spread out below us, with the dome of
St. Peter's, in the distance, standing out against a sky of gold,
and, above all, to watch "the light that broods over the fallen sun."
Nowhere in the world, at least so far as my observation of it extends,
is this wonderful glow which suffuses all the western sky with crimson,
orange and violet lights after the sun goes down -- nowhere else is this
afterglow at once so rich and so delicate as at Rome.

[Sidenote: The Sweep of History Seen from the Janiculan.]

But it is from the Janiculan Hill, on the other side of the Tiber,
that one gets the most comprehensive view of the city. Among other
things that take the eye from that commanding point there are three
hills which may be said to epitomize the history of Rome: on the east
the Palatine, where, as its name intimates, the palaces of the Cæsar's
stood, representing the culmination of the glory of pagan Rome; on
the west, the Vatican, where, as its name suggests, a prophet ought
to dwell, though I fear he does not, and where St. Peter's, with its
"insolent opulence of marble" and its colossal apotheosis of the
popedom, represents the culmination of the glory of papal Rome; and,
immediately in front, in the centre of the city, the Quirinal, where
Victor Emmanuel's royal house stands, representing the new government
of free and united Italy. From his windows in the Quirinal Palace, the
King can look across the intervening city to the windows of that other
palace where the relentless foe of his government lives, that vast,
luxurious "prison" of the Vatican, with its eleven thousand rooms, the
largest palace in the world, with its museums and libraries filled with
priceless treasures, and with its extensive gardens and grounds.

Zola has pointed out how persistent, through all these three periods
of Rome's history, has been that passion for cyclopean building, the
"blossoming of that ancient sap, peculiar to the soil of Rome, which in
all ages has thrown up preposterous edifices, of exaggerated hugeness
and dazzling and ruinous luxury." First, the pagan emperors set the
pace, and of their work we may take the Colosseum and the Baths of
Caracalla as specimens.

[Sidenote: The Colosseum and the Baths of Caracalla.]

"The Colosseum. Ah! that colossus, only one-half or so of which has
been destroyed by time as with the stroke of a mighty scythe, it rises
in its enormity and majesty like a stone lacework, with hundreds of
empty bays agape against the blue of heaven! There is a world of halls,
stairs, landings and passages, a world where one loses one's self amid
the death-like silence and solitude. The furrowed tiers of seats, eaten
into by the atmosphere, are like shapeless steps leading down into some
old extinct crater, some natural circus excavated by the force of the
elements in indestructible rock. The hot suns of eighteen hundred years
have baked and scorched this ruin, which has reverted to a state of
nature, bare and golden-brown like a mountain side, since it has been
stripped of its vegetation, the flora which once made it like a virgin
forest. And what an evocation when the mind sets flesh and blood and
life again on all that dead osseous framework, fills the circus with
the ninety thousand spectators which it could hold, marshals the games
and the combats of the arena, gathers a whole civilization together,
from the emperor and the dignitaries to the surging plebeian sea, all
aglow with the agitation and brilliancy of an impassioned people,
assembled under the ruddy reflection of the giant purple velum. And
then, yet further on the horizon, were other cyclopean ruins, the Baths
of Caracalla, standing there like relics of a race of giants long
since vanished from the world: halls extravagantly and inexplicably
spacious and lofty; vestibules large enough for an entire population;
a frigidarium, where five hundred people could swim together; a
tepidarium and a calidarium on the same proportions, born of a
wild craving for the huge; and then the terrific massiveness of the
structures, the thickness of the piles of brick-work, such as no feudal
castle ever knew; and, in addition, the general immensity which makes
passing visitors look like lost ants; one wonders for what men, for
what multitudes, this monstrous edifice was reared. To-day you would
say a mass of rocks in the rough thrown from some height for building
the abode of Titans."

[Sidenote: The Papal Passion for Terrestrial Immortality.]

Then the Popes, when they came to power, followed this pagan example,
moved by the same spirit of conquest, the same human vanity, the same
passionate desire to set their names on imperishable walls, and, after
dominating the world, to leave behind them indestructible traces,
tangible proofs of their passing glory, eternal edifices of bronze
and marble, to attest that glory till the end of time. "Among the
illustrious popes there has not been one that did not seek to build,
did not revert to the traditions of the Cæsars, eternizing their reigns
in stone and raising temples for resting-places, so as to rank among
the gods. Ever the same passion for terrestrial immortality has burst
forth: it has been a battle as to who should leave the highest, most
substantial, most gorgeous monument; and so acute has been the disease
that those who, for lack of means and opportunity, have been unable
to build, and have been forced to content themselves with repairing,
have, nevertheless, desired to bequeath the memory of their modest
achievements to subsequent generations by commemorative marble slabs
engraved with pompous inscriptions. These slabs are to be seen on every
side; not a wall has ever been strengthened but some pope has stamped
it with his arms, not a ruin has been restored, not a palace repaired,
not a fountain cleaned, but the reigning pope has signed the work with
his Roman and pagan title of 'Pontifex Maximus.' It is a haunting
passion, a form of involuntary debauchery, the fated florescence of
that compost of ruins, that dust of edifices whence new edifices are
ever arising. And given the perversion with which the old Roman soil
almost immediately tarnished the doctrines of Jesus, that resolute
passion for domination, and that desire for terrestrial glory which
wrought the triumph of Catholicism in scorn of the humble and pure, the
fraternal and simple ones of the primitive church, one may well ask
whether Rome has ever been Christian at all."

[Sidenote: The Building Boom under the New Government.]

And, finally, the new government of Victor Emmanuel, for a time at
least, was caught in the same current, infected with the same mania for
building that seems to exhale from the very soil of the Eternal City.
As the popes had not become masters of Rome without feeling impelled
to rebuild it in their passion to rule over the world, so young Italy,
"yielding to the hereditary madness of universal domination, had in
its turn sought to make the city larger than any other, erecting whole
districts for people who never came." But, fortunately for Italy,
the old idea was not unmixed with newer and better ones. Their first
delirious outburst of huge building operations has been explained as "a
legitimate explosion of the delight and the hopes of a young nation
anxious to show its power. The question was to make Rome a modern
capital worthy of a great kingdom, and before aught else there were
sanitary requirements to be dealt with; the city needed to be cleansed
of all the filth which disgraced it. One cannot nowadays imagine in
what abominable putrescence the City of the Popes, the Roma sporca
which artists regret, was then steeped: the vast majority of the houses
lacked even the most primitive arrangements, the public thoroughfares
were used for all purposes, noble ruins served as store-places for
sewage, the princely palaces were surrounded by filth, and the streets
were perfect manure beds, which fostered frequent epidemics. Thus, vast
municipal works were absolutely necessary; the question was one of
health and life itself. And in much the same way it was only right to
think of building houses for the new comers who would assuredly flock
into the city. There had been a precedent at Berlin, whose population,
after the establishment of the German Empire, had suddenly increased
by some hundreds of thousands. In the same way the population of Rome
would certainly be doubled, tripled, quadrupled, for, as the new centre
of national life, the city would necessarily attract all the vis viva
of the provinces. And at this thought pride stepped in; the fallen
government of the Vatican must be shown what Italy was capable of
achieving, what splendor she would bestow on the new and third Rome,
which, by the magnificence of its thoroughfares and the multitude of
its people, would far excel either the imperial or the papal city." We
need not follow the melancholy story of this delusion. The boom had a
disastrous collapse, and the city was left full of vast, pretentious,
flimsy, deserted palaces. The best thing about them is that they are
perishable. The lesson, happily, was not lost on the men of the new
order in Italy, and they seem at last to have extricated themselves
from the toils of that miasmatic megalo-mania. The government is sane,
sound, conservative, proceeding with care and deliberation in its
upbuilding of the country, understanding the meaning of the proverb
that "Rome was not built in a day," and it has already given the
country more security and prosperity than it has enjoyed for many, many
centuries. If it can continue to maintain itself against the priests,
there is undoubtedly a bright future before Italy.

But can it maintain itself against the priests? I think so. Yet a
man would be blind indeed who could not see their number, power and
activity. Rome swarms with them. Speaking of the incredible number of
cassocks that one encounters in the streets, Zola says: "Ah! that ebb
and flow; that ceaseless tide of black gowns and frocks of every hue!
With their processions of students ever walking abroad, the seminaries
of the different nations would alone suffice to drape and decorate
the streets, for there are the French and the English all in black,
the South Americans in black with blue sashes, the North Americans
in black with red sashes, the Poles in black with green sashes, the
Greeks in blue, the Germans in red, the Scots in violet, the Romans in
black or violet or purple, the Bohemians with chocolate sashes, the
Irish with red lappets, the Spaniards with blue cords, to say nothing
of all the others with broidery and bindings and buttons in a hundred
different styles. And, in addition, there are the confraternities, the
penitents, white, black, blue and gray, with sleeveless frocks and
capes of different hue, gray, blue, black or white. And thus, even
nowadays, papal Rome at times seems to resuscitate, and one can realize
how tenaciously and vigorously she struggles on in order that she may
not disappear in the cosmopolitan Rome of the new era." Yes, Italy will
escape from the clutches of the papacy, but she will have to work.
There must be no relaxation of vigilance or energy on her part -- or on
ours. For this multitude of young priests from every part of the world
spells menace for other lands besides Italy.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE TWO TYPES OF RELIGION IN ROME.


[Sidenote: The Cappuccini Cemetery.]

Only three or four blocks from our hotel stands the Church of the
Cappuccini, which contains one of the most gruesome sights in Rome,
the celebrated cemetery of the Cappuccini monks, the soil of which was
brought from Jerusalem. All Roman Catholic cemeteries have a peculiarly
melancholy aspect. They have none of that gentle beauty which is so
characteristic of our cemeteries, where the grass grows green under the
open sky or great trees cast their peaceful shade over "God's acre."
But this is the most weird and ghastly of them all. There are four
recesses or chapels underneath the church, the pillars and pilasters
of which are made of thigh-bones and skulls, the architectural
ornaments being represented by the joints of the spine, and the more
delicate tracery by the smaller bones of the human frame. "The summits
of the arches are adorned with entire skeletons, looking as if they
were wrought most skillfully in bas-relief. There is no possibility
of describing how ugly and grotesque is the effect.... On some of
the skulls there are inscriptions, purporting that such a monk, who
formerly made use of that particular head-piece, died on such a day
and year; but vastly the greater number are piled up undistinguishably
into the architectural design.... In the side walls of the vaults are
niches where skeleton monks sit or stand, clad in the brown habits that
they wore in life.... Yet let us give the cemetery the praise that it
deserves. There is no disagreeable scent, such as might have been
expected from the decay of so many holy persons, in whatever odor of
sanctity they may have taken their departure. The same number of living
monks would not smell half so unexceptionably." So Hawthorne says, and
I have spared my readers the most disagreeable parts of his description.

The allusion in his last sentence is one which is justified by the
olfactory organs of every visitor to Rome. The vices which were
encouraged in the magnificent baths of the emperors, and which
have given the word bagnio an evil signification the world over,
"found their reaction in the impression of the early Christians that
uncleanliness was a virtue, an impression which is retained by several
of the monastic orders to the present day." We sometimes weary of
the superabundant advertisements of the different kinds of soap in
the advertising pages of our monthly magazines. But what a wholesome
sign it is! And what a difference it marks between us and the average
Italian! And what a field for their business would be opened to
Mr. Pears and the rest if only the monks would adopt the view that
"cleanliness is next to godliness," and that, therefore, soap might be
regarded as a sort of means of grace!

[Sidenote: Some Differences between America and Italy.]

Mark Twain once described what he would say, if he were a native of
Italy, and had been on a visit to the United States, and had come back
to the Campagna for the purpose of telling his Italian countrymen
what he had seen in America: "One hardly ever sees a minister of the
gospel going around there in his bare feet, with a basket, begging for
subsistence. In that country the preachers are not like our mendicant
orders of friars -- they have two or three suits of clothing, and they
wash sometimes."... "I saw common men and common women who could
read; I even saw small children of common country people reading
from books; if I dared think you would believe it, I would say they
could write, also.... I saw real glass windows in the houses of even
the commonest people. Some of the houses are not of stone, nor yet
of bricks; I solemnly swear they are made of wood. Houses there will
take fire and burn, sometimes -- actually burn entirely down, and not
leave a single vestige behind. I could state that for a truth upon my
death-bed. And, as a proof that the circumstance is not rare, I aver
that they have a thing which they call a fire-engine, which vomits
forth great streams of water, and is kept always in readiness, by night
and by day, to rush to houses that are burning. You would think one
engine would be sufficient, but some great cities have a hundred; they
keep men hired, and pay them by the month to do nothing but put out
fires. ... In that singular country if a rich man dies a sinner,
he is damned; he cannot buy salvation with money for masses. There is
really not much use in being rich there. Not much use as far as the
other world is concerned, but much, very much, use as concerns this;
because there, if a man be rich, he is very greatly honored, and can
become a legislator, a governor, a general, a senator, no matter how
ignorant an ass he is -- just as in our beloved Italy the nobles hold all
the great places, even though sometimes they are born noble idiots.
There, if a man be rich, they give him costly presents, they ask him
to feasts, they invite him to drink complicated beverages; but if he
be poor and in debt, they require him to do that which they term to
'settle.'... In that country you might fall from a third-story window
three several times and not mash either a soldier or a priest.... Jews
there are treated just like human beings, instead of dogs.... They
never have had to run races naked through the public streets against
jackasses to please the people in carnival time; there they never have
been driven by the soldiers into a church every Sunday for hundreds of
years to hear themselves and their religion especially and particularly
cursed." 

[Sidenote: The Playful Inquisition.]

While I have Mark Twain in hand, I will make two more quotations from
him, and then dismiss him for good. Looking from the dome of St.
Peter's upon the building which was once the Inquisition, he says: "How
times are changed, between the older ages and the new! Some seventeen
or eighteen centuries ago, the ignorant men of Rome were wont to put
Christians in the arena of the Coliseum yonder, and turn the wild
beasts in upon them for a show. It was for a lesson as well. It was
to teach the people to abhor and fear the new doctrine the followers
of Christ were teaching. The beasts tore the victims limb from limb,
and made poor mangled corpses of them in the twinkling of an eye. But
when the Christians came into power, when the holy Mother Church became
mistress of the barbarians, she taught them the error of their ways
by no such means. No, she put them in this pleasant Inquisition, and
pointed to the blessed Redeemer, who was so gentle and so merciful
toward all men, and they urged the barbarians to love him; and they
did all they could to persuade them to love and honor him -- first by
twisting their thumbs out of joint with a screw; then by nipping their
flesh with pincers -- red-hot ones, because they are the most comfortable
in cold weather; then by skinning them alive a little, and finally by
roasting them in public. They always convinced those barbarians. The
true religion, properly administered, as the good Mother Church used to
administer it, is very, very soothing. It is wonderfully persuasive,
also. There is a great difference between feeding parties to wild
beasts and stirring up their finer feelings in an Inquisition. One is
the system of degraded barbarians, the other of enlightened, civilized
people. It is a great pity the playful Inquisition is no more."

[Sidenote: The Relative Rank of the Deities Worshipped in Rome.]

Speaking of a mosaic group at the side of the Scala Santa which
represents the Saviour, St. Peter, Pope Leo, St. Silvester, Constantine
and Charlemagne, he says: "Peter is giving the pallium to the Pope,
and a standard to Charlemagne. The Saviour is giving the keys to St.
Silvester, and a standard to Constantine. No prayer is offered to the
Saviour, who seems to be of little importance anywhere in Rome; but
an inscription below says, 'Blessed Peter, give life to Pope Leo
and victory to King Charles.' It does not say, 'Intercede for us,
through the Saviour, with the Father, for this boon,' but 'Blessed
Peter, give it us.'

"In all seriousness -- without meaning to be frivolous, without
meaning to be irreverent, and, more than all, without meaning to be
blasphemous -- I state, as my simple deduction from the things I have
seen and the things I have heard, that the Holy Personages rank thus in
Rome:

"First. 'The Mother of God' -- otherwise the Virgin Mary.

"Second. The Deity.

"Third. Peter.

"Fourth. Some twelve or fifteen canonized popes and martyrs.

"Fifth. Jesus Christ the Saviour (but always an infant in arms).

"I may be wrong in this -- my judgment errs often, just as is the case
with other men's -- but it is my judgment, be it good or bad.

"Just here I will mention something that seems curious to me. There are
no 'Christ's Churches' in Rome, and no 'Churches of the Holy Ghost,'
that I can discover. There are some four hundred churches, but about a
fourth of them seem to be named for the Madonna and St. Peter. There
are so many named for Mary that they have to be distinguished by all
sorts of affixes, if I understand the matter rightly. Then we have
churches of St. Louis, St. Augustine, St. Agnes, St. Calixtus, St.
Lorenzo in Lucina, St. Lorenzo in Damaso, St. Cecilia, St. Athanasius,
St. Philip Neri, St. Catherine, St. Dominico, and a multitude of lesser
saints whose names are not familiar in the world -- and away down, clear
out of the list of the churches, comes a couple of hospitals; one of
them is named for the Saviour and the other for the Holy Ghost!"

[Sidenote: The Fee of the Visitor more Important than the Soul of the
Worshipper.]

But we have allowed this clean, shrewd, racy American with his biting
satire and his outspoken common sense, to lead us far away from our
subject. Let us come back to the Church of the Cappuccini. For, besides
its horrible cemetery, it contains another object of great interest,
though of a very different character, viz., Guido's great picture of
the Archangel Michael trampling upon the devil. The devil's face is
said to be a portrait of Pope Innocent X., against whom the painter had
a spite. It is not for the purpose of describing the picture that I
refer to it, for I am not competent to do that, but for the purpose of
quoting the animadversions of another American writer upon the custom
of concealing this picture and others of special interest in Romish
churches with closely drawn curtains, requiring the presence of an
attendant to unveil them and the bestowment of a fee by the visitor.
"The churchmen of Italy make no scruple of sacrificing the very purpose
for which a work of sacred art has been created, that of opening
the way for religious sentiment through the quick medium of sight,
by bringing angels, saints and martyrs down visibly upon earth -- of
sacrificing this high purpose, and, for aught they know, the welfare of
many souls along with it, to the hope of a paltry fee. Every work by
an artist of celebrity is hidden behind a veil, and seldom revealed,
except to Protestants, who scorn it as an object of devotion, and value
it only for its artistic merit."

[Sidenote: Sensuality versus Spirituality in Art.]

The same author (Hawthorne), speaking of the terrible lack of variety
in the subjects of the great Italian masters, says a quarter part,
probably, of any large collection of pictures consists of Virgins and
infant Christs.... Half of the other pictures are Magdalens, Flights
into Egypt, Crucifixions, etc. "The remainder of the gallery comprises
mythological subjects, such as nude Venuses, Ledas, Graces, and, in
short, a general apotheosis of nudity.... These impure pictures are
from the same illustrious and impious hands that adventured to call
before us the august forms of apostles and saints, the Blessed Mother
of the Redeemer, and her Son, at his death, and in his glory, and even
the awfulness of him to whom the martyrs, dead a thousand years ago,
have not dared to raise their eyes. They seem to take up one task or
the other -- the disrobed woman whom they call Venus, or the type of
highest and tenderest womanhood in the mother of the Saviour -- with
equal readiness, but to achieve the former with far more satisfactory
success. If an artist sometimes produced a picture of the Virgin
possessing warmth enough to excite devotional feelings, it was probably
the object of his earthly love, to whom he thus paid the stupendous
and fearful homage of setting up her portrait to be worshipped, not
figuratively as a mortal, but by religious souls in their earnest
aspirations towards divinity. And who can trust the religious sentiment
of Raphael, or receive any of his Virgins as heaven-descended
likenesses, after seeing, for example, the "Fornarina" of the Barberini
Palace, and feeling how sensual the artist must have been to paint
such a brazen trollop of his own accord, and lovingly? Would the
Blessed Mary reveal herself to his spiritual vision, and favor him
with sittings alternately with that type of glowing earthliness, the
Fornarina?"

[Sidenote: The Kind of Character Produced.]

True, Hawthorne proceeds at once to weaken the force of this criticism
somewhat by referring to the throng of spiritual faces, innocent
cherubs, serene angels, pure-eyed madonnas, and "that divinest
countenance in the Transfiguration" -- all of which we owe to Raphael's
marvellous brush. But the criticism above quoted is sound. And that
Hawthorne himself saw how little such "sacred art" had availed to lift
the representatives of this kind of worship out of gross sensualism,
let the following passage witness: "Here was a priesthood, pampered,
sensual, with red and bloated cheeks, and carnal eyes. With apparently
a grosser development of animal life than most men, they were placed
in an unnatural relation with woman, and thereby lost the healthy,
human conscience that pertains to other human beings, who own the sweet
household ties connecting them with wife and daughter. And here was an
indolent nobility, with no high aims or opportunities, but cultivating
a vicious way of life, as if it were an art, and the only one which
they cared to learn. Here was a population, high and low, that had no
genuine belief in virtue; and if they recognized any act as criminal,
they might throw off all care, remorse and memory of it, by kneeling
a little while at the confessional, and rising unburdened, active,
elastic and incited by fresh appetite for the next ensuing sin."

Of course all the priests are not such as above described, as Eugene
Sue has endeavored to show in the character of Gabriel in The
Wandering Jew, and Victor Hugo in the character of the good bishop
in Les Miserables, and Marie Corelli in the character of the good
Cardinal Bonpre in The Master Christian. Hawthorne simply describes
the prevailing type. Let it be observed, too, that he is speaking of
the priests in Italy, not of those in America, among whom we are glad
to believe there is a much larger proportion of good men. Moreover, it
should not be forgotten that the present Premier of Italy has himself
stated publicly, in a passage which I have quoted in Chapter XXIX.,
that there has been some improvement, at least in the outward conduct
of the clergy, since the overthrow of the papal government, and that
the immorality of the priests and cardinals is not so shamelessly
flaunted in Rome as it used to be under the popes.

[Sidenote: The Other Type.]

On the 20th of September, 1870, the Italian army entered Rome,
after a slight resistance. This event, which marked the downfall of
the temporal power of the papacy, the unification of Italy, and
the establishment of religious liberty under the enlightened and
progressive government of Victor Emmanuel, is properly commemorated
in the name of a handsome street, Via Venti Settembre, which extends
from the Porta Pia, where the army entered, to the Quirinal Palace,
where the King resides. Appropriately placed on a street which thus
commemorates the establishment of civil and religious freedom in Italy,
are several of the Protestant churches, which for the last thirty years
have caused a pure river of water of life to flow once more through
Rome as in the days when the great Apostle of the Gentiles preached
there the kingdom of God, and taught the things concerning the Lord
Jesus Christ with all boldness, none forbidding him.

At No. 7 on this high and pleasant street we find a tall, clean,
handsome building, standing well back from the street, with a spacious,
green yard in front, the whole occupying a portion of what were once
the gardens of the Barberini Palace. A neat notice-board on the high
iron picket fence informs us that this attractive building is the
Presbyterian Church, and that the pastor is the Rev. J. Gordon Gray, D.
D.

[Sidenote: An Apostolic Preacher in Rome.]

When you enter the church on Sunday morning, a few minutes before
eleven o'clock, you find it filled with a congregation of exceptionally
intelligent people, mostly English-speaking residents in Rome and
English-speaking visitors from every part of the world, including
many Christians of other denominations besides our own -- for it does
not take visitors in Rome long to find out how strong and wholesome
is the spiritual nourishment here furnished, how broad-minded and
large-hearted the minister is, and how surely he declares the whole
counsel of God, without ever a syllable that can offend any of those
who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. If you return in the
afternoon, as you will do if you are wise, and as everybody does, in
fact, after hearing him once, you will find the house full again,
and, while you will see no splendid pageant, no rows of bishops and
archbishops in purple and lace and furs, no robing and disrobing, no
intoned service in Latin, no choral responses from high and gilded
choir loft, no clouds of incense filling the air -- you will hear the
old sweet gospel in all its pristine purity -- you will see the great
apostle and his friends before you, instinct with life and love and
zeal, as the minister lectures, with astonishing fullness and accuracy
of information and sympathetic understanding, on Roman Sites which
can be identified with St. Paul's Sojourn Here, The Saints of Cæsar's
Household in the light of the Columbaria, The Site and probable
incidents of Paul's Roman Trial, The First Martyrdoms and the probable
Site of Nero's Circus, Paul's Two Years in his Hired House, Paul's
Travels and Labors between his First and Second Roman Imprisonments,
The Closing Years of Paul's Ministry, The Jews in Rome in Paul's
Time -- and you will hear things that make for the peace of your soul and
for your upbuilding on your most holy faith as he expounds The Chief
Elements of Paul's Teaching; Christ in Early Christian Art as found
in the Roman Catacombs; The State after Death, Prayers to the Dead,
and Prayers for the Dead, in the light of the testimony of the Roman
Catacombs; The Place and Efficacy of the Sacraments in the light of the
testimony of the Roman Catacombs; and The Ministry in the Early Church
of the Catacombs.

[Sidenote: A Wise and Loving Pastor.]

Surely never was Christian workman better adapted to his work than Dr.
Gray. The sturdy frame, the massive head, the clear eye, the kindly
voice, the genial manner, the transparent sincerity, and the ready
sympathy of the man, invite one's confidence from the first, and the
longer you know him the more you value him for his rare combination of
strength and tenderness, and for his wisdom, piety and learning. We
had the good fortune to hear his sermon on the eighteenth anniversary
of the formation of his pastorate in Rome, in which he reviewed the
history of his church during those eighteen years, and the years
immediately preceding, and the growth of Protestantism in Rome since
the downfall of the papacy -- and a deeply interesting discourse it was.
It lifted one's hopes for the future of Italy. Undoubtedly the day is
breaking over the darkness which has so long lain like a pall over this
lovely land.

A good man is known by his prayers. There is a fullness, propriety
and fervor about Dr. Gray's public prayers that are seldom equalled.
The homesick stranger, with the wide ocean between him and his native
land -- the professional man wavering in health and doubtful as to the
future -- the stricken widow, who has lost her husband by the sudden
stroke of death -- as well as those who bear the usual burdens of the
human heart, find themselves strangely comforted and cheered, strangely
relieved of their toils and cares and anxieties and fears, strangely
upborne and strengthened, as this man of God pours from a sympathetic
heart the needs of his people into the ear of him who careth for us.
Among the usual petitions on Sunday morning there is invariably one
for the King of England and the royal family, the President of the
United States, and the King and Queen of Italy. We had two reminders
on the 22nd of February that it was Washington's birthday: one was the
flags hanging out at the American Embassy, and the other was Dr. Gray's
prayer of thanksgiving for the character and services of Washington. He
never forgets anything.

Yet his activities are multifarious. His resourcefulness, adequacy
and strength have long since made him the real dean of the fine force
of Protestant ministers in Rome. His advice is sought by them, and
by all manner of visitors to Rome, on all manner of subjects. He is
deeply interested in the matter of excavating the house of Priscilla
and Aquila, the Apostle Paul's friends, on the Aventine, and hopes
to raise the necessary funds and have that done -- a valuable service
to archæological and biblical learning. He ought by all means to
be allowed to find time to publish a volume on The Apostle Paul in
Rome. Dr. Gray is another of the many good gifts of Scotland to the
world, and, like Dr. Alexander Whyte, of Edinburgh, and other eminent
Scotchmen, is an Aberdeen man. They are some of the Aberdonians who
almost tempt us at times to agree with the Aberdeen man of whom our
good Scotch physician in Rome told me the other day, who said, "Tak'
awa' Aberdeen and sax miles around it, and what would you have left?"


CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE INEXHAUSTIBLENESS OF ROME.


Rome is easily the most interesting city in the world. The subject is
simply inexhaustible. Ampere said that by diligence one could obtain
a superficial knowledge of it in ten years. Just what terms should
be used to characterize the seventy pages or so that I have written,
from the basis of the desultory reading and observation of only a few
months, I must leave to the decision of the reader. "Presumptuous
sciolism," perhaps. And, yet, though I have filled these seventy
pages with what I regarded as pertinent descriptions, salient facts
and suggestive quotations from the best authorities, all subjected to
as much compression as was consistent with a fair statement of the
particular points which I wished to make, I have restricted myself
almost exclusively to one phase of the subject, viz., Ecclesiastical
Rome, and have had almost nothing to say of Classical Rome and Artistic
Rome.

Even when confining myself to this one line, I have found no
opportunity to give you any description of the Appian Way, over the
paving-stones of which the Apostle Paul entered Rome in 56 A. D. (Acts
xxviii. 14-16); or of the Pyramid of Cestius, still standing beside
the road, just outside the gate which now bears the apostle's name -- a
sepulchral monument upon which his eyes must have rested for a moment
as he passed out to his own execution -- "Among the works of man, that
pyramid is the only surviving witness of the martyrdom of St. Paul";
or of the Catacombs, those vast labyrinths of subterranean galleries,
the aggregate length of which is estimated at nearly six hundred miles,
so that if placed end to end they would extend the whole length of
Italy -- where the bodies of thousands of the early Christians were laid
in full hope of the resurrection; or of the bronze statue of St. Peter
in the great cathedral, the extended foot of which has been largely
worn away by the kisses of Roman Catholic devotees -- the figure which,
on the occasion of Pope Leo's Jubilee, our party saw dressed up in a
mitre and pontifical robes; or of Houdon's marvellous statue of St.
Bruno in the Church of St. Maria degli Angeli, of which Clement XIV.,
the Pope who is supposed to have died of poison administered by the
Jesuits, in 1774, used to say, "He would speak, if the rule of his
order did not forbid it"; or of the statue of that other Bruno who now
stands in the Campo de' Fiori, on the spot where he was burnt as a
heretic in 1600 for his advocacy of the Copernican system.

I have been able to say nothing of the remains of Classical Rome, such
as the palaces of the Cæsars, the Arch of Titus -- with its bas-reliefs
of the golden candle-stick and other treasures from the Temple at
Jerusalem, which were borne among the spoils of that Emperor's
triumph -- the monuments of the Forum, the Column of Trajan, the tomb of
Hadrian, the much lauded equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius on the
Capitoline Hill, the immensely impressive Pantheon, and the majestic
statue of Pompey, at the foot of which Julius Cæsar was assassinated.

I have not been able even to mention such masterpieces of sculpture
as the Dancing Faun, the Dying Gaul -- "butchered to make a Roman
holiday" -- the Laocoon, the Apollo Belvedere, the Young Augustus,
and scores of others, or such paintings as Guido's "Aurora,"
Michelangelo's "Last Judgment," and the scarcely less wonderful
creations of Botticelli, Titian and Domenichino.

I have had to pass unnoticed such tempting details as the Tarpeian
Rock, the site of the bridge which Horatius kept in the brave days of
old, the walls of the Paedagogium under the Palatine cliff, where a
school boy had drawn, for the encouragement of his successors, a sketch
of an ass turning a corn-mill, with the superscription in Latin, "Work,
little donkey, as I have worked, and it will profit thee"; the famous
Keyhole View of St. Peter's from the Aventine, and many others, for
which I must refer you to other books.

[Sidenote: The Best Books about Rome.]

Besides the books on Rome, such as Hare's Walks, and Hawthorne's
Marble Faun, to which I have tried to introduce my readers by
appetizing quotations from time to time in former letters, I must
mention also Dennie's Pagan Rome, Story's Roba di Roma, Mrs. Ward's
Eleanor (which contains the best descriptions of the wonderful
scenery around Lake Nemi), and the standard works of Professor
Lanciani. These are much better for home reading, and even for reading
on the spot, than the guide books. In a sumptuously bound and profusely
illustrated copy of Lanciani's New Tales of Old Rome, which was
presented to me by a friend last Christmas, I find a criticism of the
well-known passage in which Lord Mahon refers to the fact that the
last of the Stuarts, the Old Pretender, his wife, and his two sons,
are buried in St. Peter's, and where, Lord Mahon says, "a stately
monument from the chisel of Canova has since risen to the memory of
James III., Charles III., and Henry IX., kings of England, names which
an Englishman can scarcely read without a smile or a sigh." Lanciani
says, "Lord Mahon could have saved both his smiles and his sighs if
he had simply read with care the epitaph engraved on the monument,
which says: 'To James III., son of James II., King of Great Britain,
to Charles Edward, and Henry, Dean of the Sacred College, Sons of
James III., the last of the Royal House of Stuart.'" This is the only
statement, so far as I have observed, in Professor Lanciani's writings
which is not scrupulously fair. That the criticism is not perfectly
fair is clear from the very inscription which he cites, where the Old
Pretender is twice called James III.; from the inscription on the
tomb of his wife, close at hand, where she is called "Queen of Great
Britain, France and Ireland"; from the fact that the canopy under which
the body of the Old Pretender lay in state at Rome for five days,
crowned, sceptred, and in royal robes, was inscribed, "Jacobus, Magnæ
Britanniæ Rex, Anno MDCCLXVI."; and from the fact, stated by Lanciani
himself in the same volume, that when Charles Edward, the Young
Pretender, died, Cardinal York, his brother, proclaimed himself the
legitimate sovereign of Great Britain and Ireland, under the name of
Henry IX. Lord Mahon was substantially correct.

St. Peter's is a peculiarly appropriate place of sepulture for the
line of tyrannical kings who tried so hard to fasten the yoke of
Romanism upon Great Britain. They went to their own place. England
and Scotland will do well to remember that the same forces which the
Stuarts represented, and which endangered their liberties then, still
constitute the gravest menace to the true freedom of their island
empire.

One other book I must mention before finishing what I have to say
about the literature of this vast subject: the volume entitled Ave
Roma Immortalis, by Francis Marion Crawford, son of the sculptor to
whom we are indebted for the superb equestrian statue of Washington
at Richmond, with its circle of illustrious Virginians in bronze. Let
no one be deterred by the Latin title. The book itself is written
in the most delightful English. It is not to be commended without
qualification, for this prolific author who bears the name of the
immortal Huguenot partisan of South Carolina, and ought by every
consideration, so far as we know, to be a sturdy Protestant, has
suffered somewhat in his religious faith by his Italian birth and
rearing. But his book is full of good things culled from wide and
discriminating reading, the feature that is really of most value in a
book of travel.

But I must not forget that, while there is no limit to such a subject
as Rome, there is a limit to the patience of my readers. So we will
now take leave of Rome abruptly, and pass at once to Naples and its
environs, where we spent the concluding days of our sojourn in Italy.




CHAPTER XXXV.

NAPLES, CAPRI, VESUVIUS, AMALFI AND POMPEII.


Naples is the largest, dirtiest and most beautiful city in Italy. From
the balconies of our hotel, which stands high on the thickly-built
hillside, we have a matchless view -- the cream-colored city at our feet,
with its red roofs and blue domes, rising from the water's edge and
climbing the embayed mountain like half of a vast amphitheatre; the
volcano of Vesuvius beyond, lifting its white plume of warning smoke by
day, and sometimes glaring red at night; the brown ruins of overwhelmed
but disentombed Pompeii a little to the right; then the cliffs of
Sorrento; and, stretching between us and them, the bay itself, with its
incomparable crescent of contiguous cities running like a fringe of
snow round its blue waters. There -- 

 "The bridegroom Sea is toying with the shore,
 His wedded bride; and in the fullness of his marriage joy
 He decorates her tawny brow with shells,
 Retires a space to see how fair she looks,
 Then proud runs up to kiss her."



[Sidenote: Street Scenes in Naples.]

The contrast between the heavenly scenery of this bay and that
awful volcano, which stands over it like an ever-present threat of
destruction, reminds one of the cherubim which stood at the gate of
Eden to guarantee the restoration of redeemed and glorified humanity
to communion with God, along with the self-revolving sword which
symbolized the certainty and terribleness of divine vengeance upon
sin. But neither by the promises of his grace nor by the threat of
his vengeance do these people seem to be restrained from sin. Many
of them are sunk in vice. The contrast between splendor and squalor,
superfluous wealth and abject poverty, which characterizes all large
cities, is sharper, if possible, here than anywhere else. But it is the
latter, the picturesque misery of Naples, that makes most impression
upon the visitor. Some of the narrow streets, often not more than ten
or twenty feet wide, are indescribably filthy, and they swarm with
bareheaded, untidy women and half-naked children, yelling hucksters and
pertinacious beggars, dirty monks and gowned priests. All this, and
more which cannot here be set down, in one of the loveliest places on
this beautiful earth.

An observant and witty friend of mine says: "The people live outdoors,
and for the best of reason -- they would die indoors.... Into most of
the living rooms on their narrowest streets the sun never shines....
At the best, the ordinary buildings feel sepulchral, and an overcoat
is to be worn here in the house, and not on the streets! Lining the
sides of many, if not most of the streets, are shops or booths. They
are, as far as one can see, single rooms, furnished about the door with
vegetables, or meats, or maccaroni, or wine bottles, or charcoal, or
bread, the rest of the room filled with beds and tables and dressers,
with dishes and food, and shrines and highly-colored chromos of the
saints and apostles. The children are washed and dressed in the
doorways, and their heads constantly watched and investigated, much
after the friendly fashion of monkeys. By the way, peddlers are forever
thrusting small boxes of combs into our faces, insisting upon our
buying. We have not purchased any yet -- but who can tell? The people
do much of their cooking in small braziers outside the doors, on the
sidewalk, burning charcoal and fanning the fires with hats or aprons.
They have no hesitancy about eating out of the same dish and in the
public eye. Cows and goats are driven along the street and milked at
the doors into glasses or bottles, which seems a fair guarantee for the
milk being fresh. The calves and kids come to town, too, and take in
the ways of the city, along with what they get of their mothers' milk.
Women wash clothes at the public fountains, some bringing wash-boards
or flat stones, some treading the clothes in tubs with their feet. From
windows and balconies, on lines stretched along the streets and on
cane poles that almost touch the opposite houses, the wet things drip
and dry. Squads of soldiers in various uniforms pass and repass at all
times of day; old women knit and rest in the doorways; vegetable and
fish venders proclaim their wares in high, hard voices. At their cries
baskets are let down from upper windows, and the sharpest bargains
in the shrillest accents are driven in midair. If the goods are not
satisfactory, down go the baskets to the sidewalk."

Of course we visited the aquarium, said to be the finest in the world,
and the museum, with its two thousand mural paintings brought from
Pompeii, and its collection of ancient bronzes -- also the finest in the
world.

But the things that interested us most were not in Naples, but around
it -- such as Puteoli, where, many centuries ago, on a balmy spring day
like this, when the south wind was blowing softly over the sea, the
Apostle Paul landed, with Luke and Aristarchus, on his way to Rome; and
where the ruins of the Temple of Jupiter Serapis, bearing sea-marks
at various levels and having its columns perforated by lithodomites
and containing imbedded shells, shows how the building, by gradual
subsidence of the land, was first let down into the water, and then by
volcanic upheaval lifted again to the higher level.

[Sidenote: The Blue Grotto at Capri.]

Directly in front of us as we look from our windows, but far out over
the expanse of sunlit water, twenty-two miles away, we can see Capri,
lying like a turquoise gem on the bosom of the bay. Our party returned
from their visit to this enchanting island with quite new conceptions
of the color effects that may be produced by the combination of
sunlight and sea water. When the steamer stops at Capri, a short
distance beyond the town of Capri, the passengers get into small boats
and are rowed up to a lofty cliff, in the base of which, at the water
level, there is a small hole, four feet high and four feet wide, so
small, indeed, that it cannot be entered at all when the tide is up
or the water is rough. Even under favorable conditions, passengers
have to sit on the bottom of the boat and duck their heads. This is
the entrance to the wonderful Blue Grotto. "Once within, you find
yourself in an arched cavern about one hundred and sixty feet long,
one hundred and twenty wide, and about seventy high. How deep it is no
man knows. It goes down to the bottom of the ocean. The waters of this
placid subterranean lake are the brightest, loveliest blue that can be
imagined. They are as transparent as plate glass, and their coloring
would shame the richest sky that ever bent over Italy. No tint could be
more ravishing, no lustre more superb. Throw a stone into the water,
and the myriad of tiny bubbles that are created flash out a brilliant
glare like blue theatrical fires. Dip an oar, and its blade turns to
frosted silver, tinted with blue. Let a man jump in, and instantly he
is cased in an armor more gorgeous than ever kingly crusader wore." Two
boys, in the scantiest possible attire, who were standing on a ledge
when we entered, clothed themselves repeatedly in this celestial armor
for our delectation and their profit, by diving for the pennies flung
into the water by the passengers.

[Sidenote: The Ascent of Vesuvius.]

When you visit Vesuvius, make an early start and give yourself plenty
of time. It took our party four hours and a half, with a good team, to
drive from Naples to the foot of the steep cone at the top. The journey
takes you through some of the disagreeable parts of the city and gives
you a new impression of its extent. When at last you do turn from the
squalid streets and begin the ascent of the mountain, your enjoyment
begins. The fresh breeze, laden with the fragrance of orange blossoms,
tempers the heat, and at every turn of the winding, climbing road you
have the most entrancing views of the city and the bay. The mountain
itself is partly covered with the luxuriant greenery of orchards and
villas, and partly by the gloomy beds of lava thrown out by successive
eruptions -- "a black ocean, which was tumbled into a thousand fantastic
shapes -- a wild chaos of ruin, desolation and barrenness -- a wilderness
of billowy upheavals, of furious whirlpools, of miniature mountains
rent asunder -- of gnarled and knotted, wrinkled and twisted masses of
blackness that mimicked branching roots, great vines, trunks of trees
all interlaced and mingled together; and all these weird shapes, all
this turbulent panorama, all this stormy, far stretching waste of
blackness, with its thrilling suggestiveness of life, of action, of
boiling, surging, furious motion, was petrified! -- all stricken dead and
cold in the instant of its maddest rioting! -- fettered, paralyzed and
left to glower at heaven in impotent rage for evermore!"



I had had the good fortune on a former visit to see the process of its
formation. At that time the lava was actually flowing from a breach
in the side of the mountain, a little below the cone which surrounds
the great crater, and a party of us walked over a half mile or so among
the wild rocks and congealed lava to get a sight of it. The rocks over
which we walked were too hot to touch with the naked hand, and scorched
the bottoms of our shoes. The fumes of sulphur escaping through the
crevices made the air almost suffocating. These conditions became more
aggravated the nearer we came to the object of our search, so that one
or two of the party became quite unnerved, gave up the expedition, and
returned. We felt like we were walking in a furnace. Then the guide
made a turn round some great boulders, and there it was -- a slowly
moving stream of liquid fire, issuing from under a great rock, and
flowing down the side of the mountain. Every one threw his hands before
his face to protect it from the blistering heat. The guide, standing
behind a big rock, reached over with a long pole into this fearful red
river and lifted out a glob of the molten lava on the end of it, as you
would dip up a bit of hot molasses candy on the end of a fork, then,
withdrawing a little way, he disengaged the lava from the end of the
pole with a smaller stick, and, asking me for a penny, he laid the coin
on the lump of lava and pressed it well down into the mass which rose
round the edges of the coin, holding it firmly in its place -- and thus
made for me a paper weight, which is my best souvenir of Vesuvius.

The ascent of the cone to the crater is next thing to trying to climb a
church steeple. Thanks to the enterprise of Thomas Cook & Sons, there
is an inclined railway which takes you from the foot of the cone up the
steep breast of the mountain nearly to the top -- a dizzy ride, one that
makes you shut your eyes and grip the arms of your seat. Then comes
the worst of it -- the final climb through warm cinders ankle deep, which
furnish very bad footing and come over your shoe tops at every step.
There are rude sedan chairs on poles, and chair-bearers who will gladly
carry you up for an additional fee -- and there are often ludicrous
scenes when timid ladies essay this mode of ascent. The distance
is very short, so the ladies of our party determined to climb it
themselves, but, when about half way up, they were glad enough to take
hold of the looped ends of ropes while men at the other end pulled, and
so at last they stood on the very top of the great volcano. Not for
long, however, for, after they had walked round the edge of the great
crater and gotten a view of the new crater, formed within, and looking
like the heaped hole of a gigantic "doodle bug," with its slopes
made of cinders instead of sand, and sprinkled with orange-colored
sulphur, the wind veered suddenly and swept the stifling sulphur fumes
right into their faces. They ran, coughing, back over the cinders and
down again to the upper station of the railway, fully convinced that
Vesuvius, though not perhaps so impressive, was decidedly more pleasant
at a distance than at such close range.



[Sidenote: The Loveliness of Amalfi.]

Perhaps the most beautiful drive in the world is the drive from
Castellamare to Amalfi. Castellamare is about an hour and a half by
rail from Naples, and not far from Pompeii. It was here, indeed, that
the elder Pliny lost his life in the eruption of 79 A. D., which
destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum. Taking a wagonette there about the
middle of the day, we followed this magnificent road nearly all the
afternoon, as it wound in and out along the mountainside, with the
towering cliffs on one hand and the intensely blue bay on the other,
seen ever and anon through openings between the silvery olive trees
which clothed all the slopes, the view backwards being terminated by
the majestic uplift of Vesuvius, wearing a soft plum-colored tinge that
we had never seen it have before. The soil here is wonderfully fertile,
and every hillside is terraced and cultivated with the utmost care.
The orange and lemon groves, with the trees trained over trellises
and protected from too intense heat by straw, laid on frames above,
were still blooming, though the trees were heavily laden with green
and golden fruit. Every now and then little boys and girls from the
villages which are perched on the rocks or cling to the hillsides would
run after us, throwing nosegays into the carriage and expecting "soldi"
in return. After a while the scenery became more rugged, not unlike
Switzerland, with little waterfalls trickling down the cliffs, and
Scotch broom and other wild plants taking the place of the vineyards
and orchards on the towering rocks. And now we begin to drive through
tunnels cut through the cliffs and to pass over solid stone bridges,
spanning glorious ravines at a dizzy height, with the transparent sea
making in far below us, and the mountains of gray rock towering skyward
above us. And at last, in the soft evening light, we reached the
culmination of all this wonderful beauty at Amalfi. When we stopped at
the foot of the cliff on which the Cappuccini Hotel stands, overlooking
the town and the sea, we found the uniformed portiere and other
attendants in a little lodge or office at the bottom of a long, zigzag
flight of stone steps, which leads up to the high perched hotel. But
there were sedan chairs and chair-bearers to spare the ladies and the
youngest of the children the long, lung-taxing climb, and we were soon
comfortably installed in the most romantically situated hotel I have
ever seen. It was a Cappucin monastery once, and the cloisters are
still there, but the cells are now used as bed-rooms. From the windows
and balconies, and from the long and lovely arcade, covered with grape
vines and lined with the most beautiful marguerites, lilies, roses
and geraniums, the guests look down upon the picturesque little city,
the boats drawn up on the beach, the burnished Mediterranean, and the
opaline islands in the offing. And how we Protestants did sleep in the
comfortably furnished cells of those ousted monks! Amalfi is the place
I wish to come to if I am ever again in Italy.

[Sidenote: The Ruins of Pompeii.]

When we tore ourselves away from Amalfi, we drove on around by Salerno,
another feast of beauty, and took the train at La Cava for Pompeii.
For days we had been reading, or re-reading, Bulwer's Last Days of
Pompeii with breathless interest, or plodding through the dryer, but
hardly more accurate, details of the guide book -- we had been to the
museum at Naples, where the mural paintings and other disentombed
relics of the city are shown, and we had stood on the crater of the
volcano that wrought its destruction -- so that we came to the exhumed
ruins with as thorough preparation as we had found it possible to
make. But what description can prepare one for the impression of that
appalling catastrophe which one receives when he stands in the midst of
the ruins themselves, and sees how sudden and terrible the overthrow
was?



Pompeii had been shattered by an earthquake sixteen years before the
final catastrophe, but the warning had been disregarded. The place was
rebuilt with lavish outlay, and embellished with all the resources of
contemporary art, so that it was a new and splendid city which was
buried by the eruption of 79 A. D. On the 23rd of August in that year,
about two o'clock in the afternoon, terrible detonations were heard in
the mountain, and shortly afterwards an enormous column of watery
vapor issued from the top of it, remained suspended for a time in the
air, then condensed and fell in boiling rain on the mountain sides,
creating an irresistible torrent of mud, which quickly engulfed the
city of Herculaneum. Following this, later in the evening, apparently
about dark, came a roaring eruption of red hot pumice stones and
volcanic dust, succeeded quickly by other showers of the same material,
which covered Pompeii to the depth of fifteen or twenty feet. Thus was
the brilliant city, in all the exuberance of its gay life, plunged
into death in a single night. And all the inhabitants of that part of
Italy believed that they were about to share the same dreadful fate.
The air was so thick that for many miles from the volcano it was almost
stifling. It is said to have extended as far as Africa. It certainly
reached as far as Rome, and covered that city with a pall of darkness
so deep that the people took it for a sign of impending doom. They said
to each other, "The end of the world is come! the sun is going to fall
to the earth, or the earth mount up and be set on fire by the heavens."

The most graphic account of the horrors of that awful night at Pompeii
is to be found in the two letters of the younger Pliny to Tacitus.
Speaking of his efforts to remove his mother out of reach of harm,
while she was begging him to leave her to perish and save himself, he
says: "By this time the murky darkness had so increased that one might
have believed himself abroad in a black and moonless night, or in a
chamber where all the lights had been extinguished. On every hand were
heard the complaints of women, the wailing of children, and the cries
of men. One called his father, another his son, another his wife, and
only by their voices could they know each other. Many in their despair
begged that death would come and end their distress. Some implored the
gods to succor them, and some believed that this night was the last,
the eternal night which should engulf the universe! Even so it seemed
to me -- and I consoled myself for the coming death with the reflection,
Behold the world is passing away!"

No one saw the sun rise on the morrow. The clouds of volcanic matter,
still pouring their pitiless rain upon the ruins, so darkened the sky
that people could not tell when the day came.

And there, under the superincumbent mass of stones and dust, the
city slept undisturbed till a few years ago, with everything as it
was in the days of Titus. "It was like a clock that stopped when the
householder died. Meats were on the table and bread was in the oven;
sentries were in their boxes and dogs on guard at house doors." Most of
the inhabitants escaped, but it is estimated, from the skeletons found
in the ruins, that not less than two thousand lost their lives. In the
museum by the entrance at the Marine Gate we are shown the blackened
loaves of bread, recovered from the bakeries, the beans and eggs, the
chickens and dogs, or their shapes from the moulds they left -- and, most
distressing of all, human figures. "Plaster of Paris had been poured
into the hollows where bones were found, and in all the contortion of
suffocation or convulsion appeared the forms of men and women. How
little the ones whose brawny or whose delicate outlines we gazed upon
dreamt that they would be their own monuments to-day, and be seen by
the eyes of other races and ages, eyes curious, but not unsympathetic!
It was good to be in the warm sunshine again. A cloud of smoke floated
like a gray scarf -- how gracefully and innocently! -- from Vesuvius."



We walked up the narrow streets, paved with blocks of hard lava,
deeply rutted by chariot wheels, passing the Basilica, the Forum, the
Triumphal Arch, the temples, the theatres, the baths, the bakeries,
and the houses of Pansa, Diomedes, and the Tragic Poet -- all laid bare
and clean to the view. We had the good fortune to see the process of
excavation itself -- for while most of the city has been disentombed,
some of it still remains under the layers of small grayish white pumice
stones and brown dust. Three or four men were shovelling these away as
we passed. From most of the houses the furniture and wall paintings
have been taken away to the museums. But in the last large residence
exhumed, one which has only recently been brought to light, nearly
everything has been left as it was, except for a new roof of mica or
some such substance, which has been built over it for its protection.
Nearly all the frescoes are as fresh as on the day when they were
painted, and the fountain in the peristyle and its connecting pipes are
so perfectly preserved that, when the water was turned into them by the
excavators, the fountains began to play as they did on that fateful day
eighteen hundred years ago. "For as in the days that were before the
flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and knew not until the
flood came, and took them all away," so it was with the careless
dwellers in this opulent city -- and so it is with the careless dwellers
in many an opulent city to-day.

 

From Naples we turned our faces homeward, taking passage on the
König Albert, and coming by way of Gibraltar and the Azores. We
had a delightful ship's company, including Dr. Andrew D. White, the
accomplished ex-president of Cornell University and our late Ambassador
to Berlin, whom we found full of illuminating talk about Fra Paolo
Sarpi and other great men and great subjects. After a quiet and restful
voyage, affording a pleasant contrast with our experience of the
preceding summer when outward bound, we arrived at New York on the 10th
of June, 1903, deeply thankful for all the pleasure and benefit the
year had brought us, and fully convinced that, after all, ours is the
best country in the world.



