VENICE.


Yours of May 17th “just to hand.” Date of your previous one, April
23d -- I mean its receipt. This is what I call a most unreasonable space
to let slip between. So you see, if the letters come oftener, I complain
(being conscience-stricken, thinking I am imposing on your good-nature),
and if they lag a little, I complain of that. If you can, match me with
a more telling illustration of the impossibility of satisfying a woman!
I am writing with some qualms, I can tell you. You did not ask me to
write till I got to Switzerland. A mighty neat way of putting the spaces
in for me as well as yourself! Did you ever make a note of that distich
of John Hay’s -- 

 “There be three things which when you think they are coming are going -- 
 When you think they are going are coming -- 
 A crawfish, a diplomat and a woman?”

I could not get it in right, but that will not hinder you from taking in
that I am like to go



contrariwise. Besides, I know what you will miss if I do not
write -- enough to make you go into mourning, a bit of crape at your
buttonhole. You don’t know what a Florence letter I wrote to you! Now, I
am not given to self-praise; but I know the difference between still and
sparkling catawba, glass and diamonds -- stupidity and sparkle.

So I speak, “having authority” -- that Florence letter, written to you
long before I was up or the sun either; yes, just as Guercino’s maidens,
fashioned of dusk and dawn, were beginning to put the stars out -- that
was a letter! Had it only have reached you, it would have thrown you
into a fit of St. Vitus’ dance, or something equally demonstrative. I am
a light sleeper, late to bed, later to sleep and early awake. I cannot
get up ahead of all households, so I do not even hold in the fitful
fancies, but let them have it all their own way. Such fascination as the
habit is! I just snap my fingers at the frowning brows of Messrs.
Abercrombie, Upham, Sir William Hamilton and all that cloud of accordant
authorities on mental discipline. And for that letter, as for me, I did
not have any more to do with its flash and fun and sauce and sparkle
than one who sits on the sea-shore and watches the waves in a frolic,
or as Longfellow says it for me:

 “ -- -- sits in revery and muses
 Upon the changing colors of the waves that break
 Upon the idle seashore of the mind.”

Ah! if you had only got that letter! Alas! and alas! it was never even
put on paper. You do not know how sorry I am, though, that you can
never, never see it, and read it, and pirouette over it, and maybe frame
it and hang it up on your walls, to be a memorial of me forever and
forever. Indeed, I did so want you to have a Florence letter, for you
know somebody, Rogers maybe, says:

 “Of all the fairest cities of the earth,
 None is so fair as Florence.
 -- -- Search within,
 Without; all is enchantment!”

It was so while I was there! The forenoons with Raphael, Angelo, Fra
Angelica, Carlo Dolce, Guercino and a few others; the afternoons in long
drives among the haunts of Galileo, Mrs. Browning, Landor, and such
spirits. Will you ever know the delight of it, the beatitude? I hope so.
Don’t put off the coming till you are too old. But now I am in Venice!
In Venice in June! And yesterday and to-day have been each the very one
described as I have read somewhere: “The day was one of those which can
come to the world only in early June at Venice. The heaven was without a
cloud, but a blue haze made mystery of the horizon where the lagoon and
sky meet. The breath of the sea bathed in freshness the city, at whose
feet her tides sparkled and slept.” And to-morrow will be the same; and
day after day I feel in all the spirit of a prophetess. Indeed, the
weather might have been blown from Paradise. Drifting about in a
gondola! The largest, most ecstatic breath you ever drew must come in
right here. Even that will not express the exquisite, intangible bliss
of such existence. It eludes words as quicksilver eludes the grasp. I am
having long mornings, enchanting afternoons, whole days of it. Do you
wonder if I feel as if under some magician’s spell? Come, take a drift
with me, and find out for yourself. First, the length of the Grand
Canal. Your gondolier is behind; you do not see him. There is nothing to
save you from your enchanted fate. The blue sky above; the crystal waves
beneath; the beautiful, stately old palaces on either side,
time-stained, unlike anything you ever saw, a fascination to sight and
dreams, that will haunt you the rest of your life; the other gondolas
sliding by; now and then a pleasure-boat, with its crowded deck and gay
awning, and though moving by steam as noiseless as ours -- no smoke;
presently another bridge shows its span ahead, and then you slip under
it and on; next you are idly noting a pleasant looking party of ladies
and cavaliers coming from the cool archway of a palace to their waiting
gondola, and you are a little startled by hearing behind the gondolier’s
voice, “That is where Lord Beeron lived.” You remember you had meant to
ask him to point out that particular one. You rouse, lean forward, give
a curious gaze, then drop back into your drift and dreams, powerless to
keep from it! Ah! -- that is the Rialto. You rouse again, and give another
intense look, and then it is left behind. You shoot another bridge
and -- you give it up. This can not be earth. You know it is not heaven.
Where are you? Surely you are at last on the direct way to it.
Heaven -- the Heaven of not your reading the Sunday-school and catechisms
taught, but of your dearest dreams and purest moods -- that is awaiting
you there in



that dazzling glory of silver radiance where the sky and water meet. You
lean forward involuntarily, your very soul in your eyes, striving to
pierce that shining veil right to the Great Mystery. You do not feel
baffled. You might have done it, only the gondola has curved into a side
canal and your vision is shut from sight. Best so. One could not bear
such ecstasy longer and live, I think. But you are like one in a trance
for the rest of the way. Before you sleep, you open your little day-book
to make a record of the day. Here is what will greet you when you turn
its pages in the future -- “Perfect, Perfect Venice.” That is all. Will
you smile over it then? I wonder. Dear me! I hope not, for the
experience has come after my head is gray. Earlier you know -- 

 “Little we dream when life is new,
 And pleasures fresh and fair to view,
 While beats the heart to pleasure true
 As if for naught it wanted.
 That year by year, ray by ray,
 Romance’s sunlight dies away,
 And long before the head is gray,
 The heart is disenchanted.”

No! no! a thousand times, no! You will droop over it and dream it all
over again, and thrill and throb with the remembered rapture as even
now -- 

 “For passionate remembrance’ sake.”

You are good to tell me so much of your life. I am glad you had the
gracious hours at C -- -- with your friend. Will his verdict have anything
to do with the fate of the “Essays?” But you must never think of me as a
judge and critic. I appreciate, enjoy and have a wonderful fund of
enthusiasm, once it is set going. As for anything that does not “commend
itself to my taste,” I simply turn away from it. Why use the scalpel or
scathing tongue? I should be marvelously well-pleased, though, to have a
reading of the Essays.

I had a letter, so long in the coming, from Miss B -- -- some days since;
so was already in possession of the “pitiful story.” No, not that. I
think whatever comes to us is our true work, hard as it may seem at the
time. Did you ever see or hear of an argument of William Corry’s in his
prime that had a speech of Caesar’s in it? One line of it left its brand
in my memory. John (my husband) brought it to me to read when he was
George Pugh’s partner, and we were living in Cincinnati. “If I am to
die to-morrow, then that is what I have to do to-morrow.” John declaimed
it for me as he had just heard Mr. Corry. It was never to be forgotten.
I hope you have written to her ere this is in your hands, and may your
words be indeed helpful, inspiring. How often we all need such. She is a
splendid creature, so gifted for a household deity! “Caterer, cook and
nurse,” who so shines at the festal board, in the fireside circle,
wherever knowledge, wit and wisdom shed their light and graces! All that
is wanting is the proper sphere. And yet there be those so blind they
will not see! Who is of them?

What have you found in me that gave you leave to think I cared specially
for “Kentucky gossip,” or indeed for any gossip? Please, if you have
such an impression, seek for a revised edition of me. “Assuredly”
(Mahomet’s cuss-word), your letters hitherto have not run to gossip and
I have not complained. “A continuation of the same to the same,” may
chance to be all sufficient.

Yes, do not hunt up strange fiddle-strings on my account. You know I
have reached the years where old strains are best. “All the same,”
write whatever goads you to bestow it upon me. Oh! I glanced from my
window -- if you could just see that overarching sky, that is heaven; if
you could drink in a draught of this air, that is very elixir of life,
if -- if you could see what I see, feel what I feel Oh! oh! oh! Perfect,
perfect Venice!

L. G. C.

Venice, June 8, 1883.
SIENA.


February 22d, we took the train for Nice, via Lyons and Marseilles.
Spent the first night at the former and remained long enough next
morning for a drive that took in the best part of the busy, populous,
prosperous city. It is ever so much larger than I was thinking of, and
its situation is one of extreme beauty. It is situated at the confluence
of the Rhone and the Saone. Those lovely rivers wind picturesquely
through it, spanned by handsome bridges -- the Rhone by eight and the
Saone by thirteen -- dividing it into three parts, edged by broad quays
and shaded by trees. The ranges of near hills are surmounted by fine
residences, from which the loveliest views stretch out to misty
mountains in the distance to the east, south and west. Nothing was
wanting.

From there to Avignon was simply ravishing. The route descended the
valley of the Rhone, almost touching its lapping wavelets. We “stopped
off” at Avignon till the next train, which gave several hours -- time
enough to see the special things I had in my mind. Of course, it was a
kind of pilgrimage to the shrine of Petrarch’s Laura. We saw the old
Papal palace, the home of the popes during that century (from 1309-77)
of their residence there. It is an interesting but dirty old pile, being
used now as a barracks -- French soldiers, in common with their nation,
being not especially clean and neat. The torture and the prison towers
were interesting historically, but the beautiful faded frescoes on the
walls of the popes’ private chapel rather obliterated everything else.
In one place, Petrarch’s face shone forth in almost its original
freshness. The hair was golden, and the dark hazel eyes looked straight
out with a living look, as if the brain behind were busy over all they
looked upon. Mounting a little higher, we peeped into the cathedral; and
higher still, we reached the Rocher des Doms, an abrupt eminence laid
out in pleasant grounds, that command what is said to be one of the most
beautiful prospects in France.

Thence we drove to the Musée Calvet, which contains the Vernet gallery,
pictures of the four generations of that family of artists. There was a
portrait of Petrarch, over which hung one of Laura. In the garden
attached is a simple, tasteful monument to Laura -- a square pedestal
surmounted by a globe, from which rises a cross with a wreath of flowers
hung upon it. It is all of white marble. From there we continued our
drive across the bridge, from which is seen an old bridge stretching
about two-thirds of the way across the river, with crumbling walls and
arches. One end is entirely gone. I am sure it is left just as it is
because of its effectiveness as a feature in the view.

Recrossing the bridge, we drove around the greater part of the city to
see the fine old walls dating 1349, and still in an admirable state of
preservation.

The moon was just full, and rose as we shot out of the station for our
sixty-five miles run to Marseilles. We remained at Marseilles for
several hours next morning, and had the inevitable drive. It was along
the quay, and I had my first glimpse of the “blue Mediterranean.” It was
an animated and thoroughly foreign spectacle; but the wind was high and
biting, and the dust excessive, which made everything and everybody look
dirty, even myself; so I was glad to settle down in our car for Nice.

We were soon in the “tropics,” olive orchards, orange and lemon groves,
almond trees in bloom, palm trees, etc., lining both sides of the track.

At Cannes, an English lady, titled, Lady G -- -- , got into our carriage,
and she was thoroughly well-bred and agreeable. The train was crowded,
and her husband had to go into another car, our “carriage” being for
ladies only. No exception, even for “my lord.” Lady G -- -- then pointed
out Gladstone’s villa and other beautiful places, and told us with a
low, amused ripple of laughter of her gambling at Monte Carlo -- it was
very mild; she laid down a five-franc-piece, and lost; laid down
another, and won; “so I quit even,” she said. We went to different
hotels. Her carriage and servants in livery were waiting for her; and
ours, a special one sent from the hotel for just us two -- was waiting for
us. Another carriage from our hotel bore thither a handsome baron, with
a “love of a dog;” and as we arrived at the same time, our arrival
created something of a sensation! It was a lovely hotel, right on the
sea front, with a beautiful tropical garden in front -- one wing ran out
in front too; it was a two-story châlet. I had the corner room with
windows taking in all that beautiful out-doors. I saw the moon rise out
of the sea; and at intervals all night, watched her course to her
setting. Then I saw the magical clouds and lights of the dawn on the
water, and Venus rise and hurry away to herald the sun coming up in all
his glory.

We went to hear Bishop Littlejohn, of Rhode Island, at the American
Chapel in the forenoon; walked on the fashionable promenade in the early
afternoon; then a tram-drive to the cemetery to see Gambetta’s monument
and grave. The cemetery is on a high hill whose top is a fine plateau.
In the most conspicuous part is a large square railed in by an iron
fence entirely concealed by floral devices. In the center of this square
rises a lofty pyramid, composed of floral offerings of every conceivable
device, that were sent, it would seem, from the uttermost parts of the
earth, to his funeral. Scattered round are other pyramids of the same. I
think they said in Paris there were five hundred thousand floral
offerings or tributes sent.

Next day, we made an excursion to Monaco and Monte Carlo! The former has
the royal palace atop of a height with a view that would make a lazarone
of me! I am sure I could do nothing but sit in “rapt ecstasy” and gaze
at the blue sky, through the sycamore branches, or the denser blue sea
from the balustrades that run along the edge of the great square in
front. There is a barrack also. You know Monaco is one of the smallest
kingdoms in the world. Its standing army numbers fifty soldiers! I saw a
number of the fine, amiable-looking fellows. They looked trim,
immaculate and soldierly, and as if they did not enjoy to the fullest
extent their superabundant idleness. I can not attempt to describe the
luxurious and sumptuous magnificence of the royal apartments. A lovely
drive of ten or twelve minutes took us thence to Monte Carlo. We went
into the Casino, the great gambling palace, made the tour of its superb
halls and eight large tables crowded with players of both sexes and all
ages and ranks. It made me heart-sick in a very few minutes, and I sat
apart watching the anomalous and painful spectacle till my companion
wearied, too, which was not till she had tried her luck and like Lady
G -- -- , “come out even.” We had a dream-drive home in the late afternoon.
Next morning, a party of seven of us chartered a kind of coach for the
celebrated Cornichen drive over the old Roman route as far as Mentone.
From there we went to Genoa by train, never out of sight of something
of exquisite beauty. Then Genoa for two nights and a day, a “field day”
of sight-seeing -- four palaces, four churches, a drive and shopping! Pisa
for another night and day; saw its incomparable group -- Duomo, Campanile,
Baptistery and Campo Santo. How little I had conceived of their
magnificence and beauty! From Pisa to Siena. Such a wonderful old place
as this is! We leave to-morrow for Naples, via Rome, for a day, to “do
it,” and return to Rome for Holy Week and Easter. I set aside three
months for Italy, but Rome and Florence are a world in themselves for
me. It snowed here yesterday; so it is very cold to-day.

I have had views at intervals of snow-covered mountains from Lyons here.
I saw Mont Blanc distinctly -- a colossal white specter, towering grandly
in the upper heavens -- at one point on the way. They said it was about
ninety miles distant. They are splendid to look at, but not to feel.
This cold on my travels has cut me down so. I am too stupid to write a
decent letter.

L. G. C.

Siena, March 4, 1883.




ROME.


I left Paris four weeks ago this morning. I cannot for the life of me
remember if I have written to you in that time. Seems to me, though, I
wrote from Siena. Anyhow, I will make that my starting point. From there
we -- the lady who is traveling with me is an Ohioan from G -- -- 
originally, and the sister of H. H. B -- -- , the historian of the tribes
of the Pacific coast -- went to Naples via here. We spent a night and a
day driving about in the brilliant sunshine, seeing many points of
interest by way of preparation for my return. Then on to Naples. It was
raining hard and 11 o’clock at night when we reached it. Several days of
promiscuous rain and shine, the former out of all proportion to the
latter, rather disgusted me. I could not get to Capri, to Baja, to the
top of Vesuvius. I had the views between showers of that world-renowned
bay, and went in them to the churches, museums, and the lovely palace,
Capodimonte. It both rained and snowed a little while I was inside the
last. Of course you know it is atop of one of the loftiest points about
N -- -- , and that it is full of pictures and all kinds of lovely things.
But there is one painting there I think you may not have heard
of -- Michael Angelo kissing the hand of his dead friend, Vittoria
Colonna. You remember he once afterwards regretted he had not kissed her
brow or lips. This is a grand picture, the figures life-size. Vittoria
lies shrouded in a rich white satin robe, confined about her feet with
laurel branches. The face has a worn look -- that of

 “long disquiet
 Merged in rest.”

Angelo is bending down, with his lips touching her folded hands and his
countenance knotted with grief and the heavy sense of loss. Ah! no
future would ever be to him like the past! I felt his loss like my own;
and the tears sprang quick and blinding. This was the only picture of
them all I brought away with me. At the Museum, the Pompeian frescoes,
the Farnese Hercules Bull, made the deepest impression. One of the
frescoes, a Nereid on the back of a sea panther, I tried to get a
photograph of, but failed. You know Donneker’s Ariadne? I think he must
have got the idea from this, and as I have it in ivory -- the most
perfect little gem -- I wanted this too. I saw a very curious and
interesting spectacle in one of the churches, St. Dominico, in the
sacristy: the coffin of the Marchese di Pescara, Vittoria Colonna’s
husband. It was one of a number, ten of which contained the remains of
kings and queens, placed around the walls just below the ceiling. They
had faded scarlet covers. On his was an inscription by Aristo; above it,
his portrait; at one end, his banner; and attached to the side, his
sword. Everything concerning that noble woman is of the deepest interest
to me; so I made a pilgrimage to see the portrait and coffin of the
lover-husband she has embalmed in her verses.

The rain continuing, we “broke up camp,” and went to Pompeii. It poured
for a day and a half there; and then the sun burst forth and I spent all
Sunday in that exhumed city. Impossible to convey the slightest idea of
the fascination of it. Come and try it for yourself. At night Vesuvius
added the strange and rather terror-inspiring charm of its glowing
crater, slow-flowing lava and brilliant column of smoke rising far
aloft. It kept me going to my window all night. I’ll tell you about it
some day. Next to La Cava, a beautiful town in a vale surrounded by
chains of the most picturesque mountain peaks. There it rained and
snowed again -- snowed heavily on the mountain tops. All the vale was
dressed in the “living green” of mid-spring. The snow in it was a March
flurry. From there we had a lovely drive -- a Cornichean drive -- around the
headlands of the sea to Amalfi. Read Longfellow’s poem “Amalfi.” I
clambered to the Convent (now a hotel) for the view and lunch. Both were
incomparable. Read the poem copied in the Guest-book and shown with
great pride, and left as Eve left Paradise, “with reluctant steps and
slow.” Next day, Paestum! Oh! those inexpressible ruins! What an element
worship has been in the life of our race. I never realized this more
deeply than in those majestic old temples. I gathered acanthus from
crevices in the crumbling columns and stones of the floors. Next day
Castellamare and Sorrento, with another ideal drive between them. At the
latter, I went to the finest orange grove in that district, and gathered
oranges from the trees for myself. Ah! that was fruit fit for the gods.
Naples again and rain. I waited two more days for Capri in vain. Spent
them at the Museum, where I fell in love again -- and this time with
youth and beauty, a bronze statuette of Narcissus listening to Echo. If
I gave myself leave how I could rave about it. I got every
photograph I could find and mean to have a copy if I can find one. It
was found in Pompeii. What lovers of beauty peopled that ill-fated city.

I have been here since Saturday. Sunday was Palm Sunday at St. Peter’s.
I went. The grand edifice did not disappoint. The ceremonies and music
did. Shall I send you a leaf of the consecrated palm? Monday was spent
in getting settled. Tuesday, the Albani Villa. To-day, the Sistine
Chapel and Raphael’s Transfiguration at the Vatican; and Guido’s Aurora
at the Rospigliosi Palace.

Have I ever told you how I wished with a passionate intensity to spend a
full winter in Rome? and now I am having the fulfillment. Almost I can
believe Goethe, “Time brings the fulfillment of what is passionately
longed for when we are young.” Those are not his words perhaps, but they
convey his idea. When I first read them twenty or twenty-five years ago,
I did not agree with him. Curious that the flight of time which has made
me reject faith in the principle of compensation, should make me a
believer in that.

“Whoever,” says Chateaubriand, “has nothing else left in life should
come to Rome to live; there he will find for society a land which will
nourish his reflections, walks which will always tell him something
new.” Read again what Hawthorne says in “The Marble Faun,” that after
one has lived in Rome and talked it and left it, he is astonished to
find his “heartstrings have mysteriously attached themselves to” it “and
are drawing him thitherward again, as if it were more familiar -- more
intimately his home than even the spot where he was born.” Do you know I
feel every word of this! If you want to have a touch of this Roman fever
read, stopping to make pictures to your mind’s eye as you read “The
Marble Faun,” Hans Andersen’s “Improvisatore,” Storey’s “Robe di Roma,”
and Ouida’s “Ariadne.” This last you must give me your opinion of. I
have been to all the places she names; almost to all each names. The
weather is mild, generally sunshine to make one think the worship of
that luminary not the worst the world has ever known.

Spring flowers are thick everywhere. Yesterday brought such a clever
letter from Miss D -- -- . I think I must quote a bit or two to give you
“a taste of her quality.”

I had sent some Xmas souvenirs to her and her sisters. Of the younger
two -- very young -- she said: “You should have seen D -- -- and M -- -- when
they told their friends, ‘My cousin in Paris sent me this,’ with the air
of being thankful that they were not as other little girls that had no
cousin in Paris.”

L. G. C.

Rome, March 19, 1883.






ROME.


We spent a day at Amalfi. From La Cava, a pretty town in an extensive
vale shut in with the most picturesque chains of mountains, we took an
open carriage for the three hours’ drive. It soon struck the seacoast
and wound all the rest of the way around its headlands, doubling its
promontories, retreating into its bays and inlets and dropping almost to
the water’s edge, and presently mounting upward into almost Alpine
heights. The headlands and cliffs were frequently broken into every
imaginable form of rock sculpture -- columns, cones, pyramids, grottoes
and castellated walls of defense and fantastic ruins. The sea beat the
shore, here, a sheer precipice, and there a white sanded beach, then
rolled away a tangled mass of the most exquisite and innumerable shades
of blue, green, purple, black, gold and silver. The coast stretched
around in a vast semi-circle of silver till it lost itself in the misty
horizon. Little villages lay at our feet, ran up the hill-sides with
their terraces of orange-groves, or clung to the cliffs far overhead
like martins’ nests in winter. A long range of snow-capped mountains
reared themselves above Salerno, and sent us an icy blast now and then.
There had been quite a snow the day before. We rattled up to our
“albergo” at eleven. This was at the foot of the hill; our destination
was an old monastery of the Capucins, now a hotel, of which this was the
porter’s lodge. The same proprietor conducts both. He met us with the
welcome accorded to favored guests, and gave us a guide, and we were off
at once.

The practical should not be neglected entirely for the picturesque, so,
we “took in” on our way, a macaroni factory. We saw the flour, then the
kneading, last the moulding. The kneading is quite peculiar, and a long
and fatiguing part. There is a flat, round table with a beam that works
on and around it, the dough being placed between. Six youths of eighteen
or twenty were on the end and worked it up and down and back and forth.
The whole had a joint resemblance to a grist-mill and the game of
see-sawing. The boys were bare-legged and looked very clean and cool.
When the dough is sufficiently kneaded, it is transferred to the mould.
This is a cylindrical-shaped machine, filled with the small cylinders
through which the dough is forced to convert it into the little tubes
with which we are so familiar. The dough is placed on one end and the
pressure applied, which forces it through. The several squads of workmen
are very eager to show off at their best, their palms tingling, no
doubt, in expectation of the accustomed fee.

Leaving this factory, we began climbing steps. The monastery is the
hollow of a rock, which rises abruptly from the sea, has cloisters, a
veranda, a “terrace-walk,” a kind of collonade, and from innumerable
points the most charming views. Longfellow had been there ahead of me,
for which I “returned thanks” on finding in the guest-book his poem
“Amalfi.” As I read it my eyes went wandering over all therein so
felicitously described. The salon was the refectory of the monks, and
each window, glazed to the floor, opened on a veranda. I shut myself out
on one, and, leaning on its solid stone balustrade, gave myself up to
the dreamy fascination of the “enchanted land.” Do read the poem, and
try to picture each feature with your mind’s eye. The description is
perfect. After lingering till the very last moment, we found our guide,
and took another route to the albergo, where we had left our carriage.

Whether the descent to Avernus is easy or not depends upon the grade of
descent. That was not many degrees removed from “sheer.” Believe me, it
was not “easy.” It dropped us on the beach, and the “white-caps” gave us
close chase here and there. Nothing to compare, though, to that of a
battalion of little beggars who became so importunate, we had to turn
our umbrellas into weapons of both defense and attack, whereupon they
yelled and shouted with laughter. So we parted “merry foes,” if neither
side could boast a triumph.

The earth never saw a more perfect morning than the following. That was
to be our Paestum day. Our host, a number of countrymen and
countrywomen, even the station porter who carried our lunch basket to a
carriage on the train which was to take us part of the way -- one and all
exclaimed: “How fortunate you are! You could not have a more splendid
day to see the ruins.” Fourteen miles by rail and then a carriage again
for a drive of two and a half hours. The sea was “radiantly beautiful,”
a wide expanse of flashing wavelets. Leaving it, the route crossed
marshy plains, occasionally dotted with small herds of buffaloes and
other cattle. The mountains kept along with us, gradually diminishing in
height until they sank into the low coast. After awhile the first
glimpse of the temples. That was a sensation! It is said of these
temples that they were built in the ancient Greek style, and are, with
the exception of those at Athens, the finest existing monuments of the
kind. The temple of Neptune is the largest and most beautiful of the
three. Its magnitude, massiveness and grandeur, added to the purpose for
which it was erected -- the worship of a deity -- make it the most imposing
ruin I have seen. This last makes the wide difference between it and the
Coliseum, for which, had it that consecration, there would be no words.
I wandered round, through it, gathered wild acanthus from crevices in
its columns and clefts in its floor; gazed at the near sea at one end,
passing an arm round one of its mighty symmetrical columns, not
encircling it, you may be sure, as the diameter is seven and a half
feet; followed the slow grazing of sheep on those once-sacred grounds;
sat down on the broken and half-buried steps inside, and looked up at



the intense blue of Italy’s noon-day sky; went to different points
around it to get every aspect of

 “That noble wreck of ruinous perfection,”

and felt it impossible to sufficiently admire it. The Basilica near by
is also of great magnitude, but less and not so majestic in its
proportions. The third is the Temple of Ceres. It is comparatively
small, but full of simple majesty. As I looked at these wonderful ruins,
what most strangely moved me was an appreciation of the power and glory
of man, and the recognition of what an element worship has been in the
history of our race.

Another was my Sorrento day, which meant one of those ideal drives
called “Cornichean,” because of the road’s projecting like a cornice
from the headlands and precipitous hill-sides. In some places, the road
is cut out of the solid rock; in others, it pierces it, forming
beautiful arches, but always keeping the sea in view. This kept also
Ischia, Capri and Vesuvius before the charmed gaze. No other point
commands such fine and complete outlines of Vesuvius -- its perfect
gradual upward sweep and swell from the water’s edge to its cone, with
the ever-rising column of smoke. Part of this drive takes its way
through orange and olive groves and mulberry trees, figs, pomegranates
and aloes, mingled in delicious suggestiveness. The town itself is
small, and situated amid these delightful groves, rather orchards, on
rocks rising abruptly from the sea, with deep ravines on the other side.
It was the birthplace of Tasso; and it is said, the house in which he
was born and the rock on which it stood have been swallowed up by the
sea, and that the ruins are still visible beneath its clear blue waters.
Nearly the entire sea-front is occupied by hotels, situated in gardens,
with steps descending to the sea; and bathing establishments commanding
magnificent views. We visited its shops, celebrated for their inlaid and
carved wooden work and silks.

My second trial of Naples was as unsatisfactory as the first. It rained
in torrents, and then I “gave up in despair.” The trip from Naples back
to Rome almost made me forget my grievance. It was full of historic
interest and association. We passed “ancient Capua,” where Spartacus led
in the war of the gladiators. Just this side of it is a district so
productive it yields two crops of grain and one of hay in the same
season. We had a splendid view of the celebrated monastery of Monte
Casino, situated on the top of a lofty hill. It is founded on the site
of an ancient temple of Apollo, to which Dante alludes in his
“Paradiso.” Thomas Aquinas was educated there. Varro’s villa was near,
and it is to one of its abbots that the world is indebted for the
preservation of his works. Its library is celebrated for its
manuscripts, and some of them suggested to Dante his great works. In
sight was Aquino, the birthplace of both Thomas Aquinas and Juvenal.

Rome. Here, in the “Eternal City.” Every day is one to be chronicled.
The day after I came was Palm Sunday. I went to St. Peter’s to see both
it and the ceremonies of the distribution of consecrated palms. I will
not describe St. Peter’s. Had I not already seen Westminster Abbey, St.
Paul’s and all the other most celebrated English cathedrals, no doubt
the impression would have been overwhelming. The ceremonies were very
unimposing; the music was not extraordinary; high mass was performed in
one of the chapels, which dwarfed it to a very commonplace performance;
and the distribution of palms was done by children, poor,
forlorn-looking friars and licensed peddlers, the consecration having
been previously done by one of the cardinals.

While the services were being performed in the chapel, people were
walking and rambling all over the rest of the vast temple, and unless
quite close to it, might have been quite unaware that anything was going
on within. As no seats were provided, I went out and joined the
ramblers. Presently I came upon the bronze statue of St. Peter, the toes
of which are being worn away by the kisses of the devout. I found a seat
and sat down to look on. Every class and grade was represented, from
prince and princess to pauper and villain, the former using their dainty
perfumed handkerchiefs to wipe a spot before touching their lips to it;
the latter, their ragged and tainted sleeves. One young priest wiped the
side of the foot and kissed it, instead of the much-imposed-upon toes.

To the end of “Holy Week,” I devoted myself to seeing its various
services. Each church has its special services. In that of St.
Apollonari, the washing and kissing the feet of the disciples is done by
a cardinal. I waited through a prolonged service of nearly four hours to
witness it. There were thirteen youthful priests seated in a row on a
bench raised two steps above the floor for the greater convenience of
the rather too fat father. Each in succession thrust out a bare foot as
he knelt, then washed, wiped, and, so far as I could see, gave an honest
kiss. There was a crimson satin cushion for him to kneel on, which,
however, the attending priests forgot to move along for him, so he had
to use the bare floor. I was suspicious enough to think the omission was
intentional. All his gorgeous vestments were removed while he was doing
this, and he looked a very plain, humble creature indeed.

In another was high mass and the showing of part of the cross to which
Christ was bound to be scourged. This church is opened but the once in
the year, and then only to ladies. No man can enter under pain of
excommunication. The other part of the cross is in Jerusalem. I urged a
very agreeable elderly English lady to go to see it. For reply, she
looked at me with a twinkle in her shrewd eyes, and said: “I am not
going to spend my time in any such tomfoolery as that.” What a homelike
sound her unvarnished English had!

In yet another there was a grand ceremony of showing the heads of St.
Peter and St. Paul -- a ghastly spectacle at best. But the glory has
departed from Catholicism in Rome. “Holy Week” is a very tame period
now-a-days. One could be here and not hear of it. Indeed, it was with
great difficulty that we could get any accurate information of its
program. In only one church was there a jam. The pope never shows
himself; his seclusion is said to be absolute. All of the grandest
spectacles and ceremonies are omitted, so “Holy Week” is rapidly ceasing
to be an attraction.

We had a delightful drive on the Via Appia, that old Roman road, built
three hundred and twelve years before Christ, that even to-day, is
called the “queen of roads.” This is the finest of the near excursions
in the Campagna, the ruins of the aquaducts, mountains and villages,
while the remains of ancient tombs on each side of the road are a unique
and singularly fascinating feature. We took it in to visit the catacombs
of St. Callistus; the tomb of Caecillia Metella; the grotto and grove of
Egeria. Stopping at the Catacombs, we were provided with wax tapers and
guides and plunged down a precipitous stairway, and in a moment would
have been plunged in Plutonian darkness but for these little lights that
only served “to make darkness more visible.” Next came threading our way
through narrow, tortuous passages,



single file, coming occasionally to tombs of some extent, containing the
bodies of popes, saints and “other people.” In several of these were
paintings, the subjects of which were still quite easily made out. Some
of the decorative inscriptions date as far back as the fourth century,
and the frescoes to the seventh and eighth. In one chamber are two
sarcophagi still containing the skeletons of the deceased, which are
seen through a glass cover; one looking like a mummy, the other very
much crumbled. The guide hurried us, so the visit was rather confusing,
and I came out. The tomb of Caecillia Metella was a fascination to me I
was scarcely prepared for, notwithstanding my remembrance of Childe
Harold’s famous description. To reach the Grotto of Egeria, we had to
take a walk through some fields, and descend a hill into a ravine
through which a little brook, the Almo, flows in an artificial channel.
The Grotto is not large, but very beautiful, draped with ivy over the
entire arch of the opening. On the wall facing the entrance is a
mutilated statue. The fountain bursts from the wall to the right of it
about four or five feet from the floor. A peasant was filling his
vessels from it and he gave us a drink. It was clear, cool and of
pleasant flavor. Thence a further walk along the brook and the ascent of
not a very high hill, led to a grove of thick and striking ilex trees.
They are of great size and evergreen. I went under every tree to be sure
I did not miss that at whose roots Numa learned his lessons of wisdom.

 “Egeria, sweet creation,
 Whatsoever thy birth,
 Thou wert a beautiful thought and softly bodied forth.”

L. G. C.

Rome, April 4, 1883.






ROME.


You see you did right about the address, sending the letter to care of
Paris banker. I have it, and it came “on time,” good time, not loitering
by the way or flying off at a tangent. The one point I object to is the
soft rebuke to me for not having specified an address. I had given you
all that I expected to. It is too much of a risk to change my address
with the changes of place of such a vagrant. Now, stick to H. & Co.,
etc., till I write you to do otherwise. You will be a sharp, yes,
pre-destinated fault-finder if you can hook a grumble on that. I defy
you. Thanks for your appreciation of the letter! I am sure I did not
mean anything so extraordinary. You say so many pleasant things, I
cannot ignore them, as is my wont. I hope you are like Lady Geraldine,
who

 “Said such good things natural,
 As if she always thought them.”

Anyhow, it is wonderfully exhilarating to feel I have put out the
Bermuda burner. Her scintillations were vastly oppressive.

I have recently been reveling in Guercino’s fresco of Aurora, widely
different from Guido’s famous one, but I think I like it quite as much.
Aurora herself is the central figure, a lovely, radiant creature
embodying all the glimmer, glow and glamor of the dawn, seated in her
car drawn by two splendid steeds, mottled with the dusk they were
scattering and the light they were heralding. She was dropping flowers
as she sped onward; a lovely cherub hovered in the air before stretching
chaplets of exquisite flowers toward her; another, nestling in the
cloudy folds of her drapery behind, looked over the edge of the car
right into my eyes with his that seemed just as living. Do not tell on
me; but I make rosebuds of my lips at him every time we catch each
other’s eyes, and he seems to enjoy the pantomine. Just in front of the
horses’ heads, the earliest hours, bewitching young maidens, are putting
out the stars, each with extended forefinger and thumb, flashing lightly
up to the pretty sparks. It looks the most fascinating “task to do.” You
cannot help feeling a quiver in your own fingers to try it. Away ahead
of all a bat is flying from the coming light. You think in a flash of
that beautiful song:

 “Come into the garden, Maud,
 The black bat, Night, is fled.”

And now the quiver in my finger is gone:

I have put out that transcendant Star that made a “vexed Bermoothes” of
me!

And I hope Guercino’s manes will take no offense at this association of
ideas!

Ah! this imperial Rome -- this unapproachable queen of the earth -- every
day I am more and more overcome by “the toils of her beauty” and
enchantments. The magic of yesterday is lost in that of to-day; and for
that of to-morrow I shall be dumb, having no words to express it. I
wonder how anyone can ever get free from her wonderful fetters forged of
everything that adds charm to life. From the deep blue of its sky, the
crystalline dazzle of its atmosphere, the unutterable fusion “of all the
hues of all the earth,” and the varied outline of hill and vale and
mount and wide-spread campagna -- all this, just the mere outside, the
physical Rome, to her treasures of myths, history, etc., everything you
know, why attempt to enumerate? She is in everything -- “Mistress of the
World.” I, for one, am her willingest, lealest, lovingest subject or
slave, as you will. It seems to me at times as if of all I have ever
known there is nothing very worthy that has not some associations with
her. Living within her walls brings out all that was written long ago on
the memory, but grown from the lapse of time and the swift succession of
experiences into an “invisible writing,” as it were. Yes, brings it out
just as heat will bring that out. At every turn there is a great name,
or some great monument of the mighty dead, and as you pause to look you
ponder and remember what made the name great, who built the great
monument, who indeed were the mighty dead! Sometimes you know so much it
is a kind of intoxicating joy. Oh! yes; many times -- most times of
course, you know so little.

Do not think of being afraid or ashamed of admitting that. And then such
a hunger and thirst as takes possession of you for knowledge, more
knowledge, and yet more and more. The hunger and thirst of one perishing
in the desert can but faintly shadow this forth. You think of that
wonder-story of Eve, and the condemnation of her that has been a
birth-right and grown with your orthodox growth, insensibly softens into
sympathy. Presently you will find yourself admitting you too might
have -- yes, would have eaten that apple! For it meant -- knowledge, more
knowledge! I -- I -- am shocking you. Well, come thou also, and see if it be
possible not to rave -- 

 * * * * *

Are you in the mood for a tramp? Come, let’s be off. There is an old
church -- S. Onofrio, on the slope of the Janiculus we ought to see. It
is off to the west, no great distance from St. Peter’s. The Salita (or
ascent) is steep. It is a warm, relaxing day -- do not go too fast; you
will get into a perspiration if you do, and then you will have to take
care of a breeze or a draught, and maybe catch cold, after all. Best not
hurry. What is there up there, anyhow? Why -- ever so many things you
would not miss for -- anything. The quaintest old structure dating from
1439 -- ahead of America! and built in honor of Honophrius, whose story is
disgusting to me; but let that go. Here is what I like better. Tasso
lived there -- I do not know how long -- and died there. The whole place is
far more full of, and fragrant with, his memory than that of the saint.
The chapel in which he is buried has an immense affair in the way of a
monument. It is not considered a work of “high art,” so we shall not
linger.

Here in a chapel beside his is the tomb of Mezzofanti, the linguist; a
simple slab in the floor, with the name and dates. I like it. Somehow I
am in such a fever to go on. I do not care much for the pictures, though
some have great names. Here -- through this corridor. It leads to the
“cell” which Tasso occupied and in which he died. The custodian opens
the door. I step in first, and involuntarily step back. Facing me is a
full-length fresco portrait of the poet on the wall, so life-like, for
the moment the illusion is complete. In the center of the room is his
bust. It was taken from the cast of his face in death; it is in a glass
case. On the wall behind is another glass case, in which is an autograph
letter, much tattered and torn and yellow with age. There are also his
gloves, belt, etc. Ranged against the wall and protected by a railing
are some large, square, leather-covered chairs, in frames of oak or
walnut, with gold-gilt ornamentation. On another side, also in a large
glass cabinet, is the coffin in which he was first interred. The “cell”
itself is a good-sized room, with three windows, two commanding fine,
extensive views. There is a garden attached, with a riven oak, the
remains of that under which Tasso used to sit. We must go and sit there
too. The walk lies between large beds of growing vegetables. You see
ahead your goal -- a sharp little rise, from the side of which, half-way
up, leans out remains of the tree. On one side is an old wall, rather a
fragment; on the other, some steep, high steps, up which you know you
will have to toil “for the view.” Almost in a breath you are doing it,
and -- ugh! at every step a swarm of glancing lizards! I cry: “Look out
for the lizards!” A lady ahead of me, already at the top, seated on a
part of the wall, says coolly, if encouragingly: “You know they are
harmless. Why are you afraid?” I protest: “I am not afraid; but a lady
carried one home with her yesterday in the folds of her skirts, and it
was there ever so long, I know. I don’t wish the experience of a lizard
for a vade mecum.” So I gather my skirts close and above my boot-tops,
and do not miss the view indeed; but neither do I those legions in their
brilliant uniform of green spotted with gold. And the view! St. Peter’s
on the left, still farther west; the city to the east, with its
innumerable domes and spires; and far beyond, the beautiful mountains,
some of their tops lost in the blue mist; and overhead, the broad arms
of the oak, with their budding sprays. The warm air makes you feel a
curious languor. You too sit down, feeling as if you were swooning into
that noontide. Only a moment, though -- those lizards!

It is time to go. You make the circuit of the gnarled roots; try to
break off a bit of the riven edges, to find them as hard as adamant;
look up and sigh to find the leaves quite beyond reach; then turn away
for good and all. After a step or so, you find you are still clutching
at your skirts! And as you reach the walk again, the other lady looks
back and says meekly and deprecatingly, “I feel as if I had a thousand
lizards on me.” One can forgive the answering peal of laughter; it is
meriment only, not triumph. Then both gave wings to their feet! Can
you keep up? I lay a wager you think you can!

Then another prowl. Do you not want to see that statue of Pompey, “at
whose base Great Caesar fell?” I have thought of it and of “Great
Caesar” many times. Indeed, it is one of the first thoughts when one
sees the forum. The statue is in the Palazzo Spada; is in an immense
ante-room. It needs to be, so



colossal is the statue. The workmanship is not considered very fine, but
a strong interest must always attach to it on account of the
association. The Palazzo is well situated, but it is near the Jew
quarter called the Ghetto, and which is one of the characteristic
sights. The street is narrow and tortuous, winding between houses six
and seven stories high. The dwellers live literally out-doors, for even
if inside the house, it is all wide open. The women are sitting, plying
their various avocations, all seeming to be made up in some way of old,
filthy clothes. The men are roving about just as busily. The children
are at play so thick, there is some discretion required to enable one to
thread his way without stepping on them. All are unkempt, unwashed,
unattractive. Both smells and looks are revolting. Curiosity is soon
satisfied. We hurry. Just ahead of us is the house of Rienzi, and near
by a pretty little ruined temple called that of Vesta; these are on the
bank of the Tiber, and just at the foot, as it were, of the Palatine.
Further on is the Protestant cemetery, where are buried Keats and the
heart of Shelley. I have been to both. Fresh flowers were lying on the
slab over the latter, while the grave of Keats was a mass of sweet
violets. There is a neat hedge around it, and everything betokens kindly
and constant care. Poor fellow! His name is not written in water. Oh!
but I must break off. There is no end to all I wish I could tell you. I
sympathize with you in the loss of that lovely woman, Mrs. D -- -- . Such a
frail, tender life; the wonder is it has lasted so long. I had heard
something of what you mention. Believe

 “It is better to have loved and lost
 Than never to have loved at all.”

Yes, the added verse is an immortality. May I indeed be there to hear,
and all our “beautiful beloved” who have gone before. You did not
mention our dear one, Miss B -- -- . Do you know anything about her? I have
had no letter since I wrote to you, but so many of my letters do not
reach me, I attach no blame to her, only I wish so much to hear. And
will you make the race for governor? If so, I will put up special
prayers for your election. Then if you are elected, you will invite us
two to visit you in that castle made without hands. Won’t you, please.
Thanking you for all your kindly expressions and injunctions.

L. G. C.

Rome, April 24, 1883.




ROME.


In Rome still, but this is my last week. Were I to write many books, I
could not get in the half of these wonder days in this queen city of the
world. Yes, crowned so long ago, she still wears her royal diadem, and
will wear it even as the old lines have it:

 “While Rome stands, the world stands!”

I have made the rounds of the churches, that of the galleries and
museums, that of the villas and palaces, and finally that of the -- shops.
Take notice, that of the studios, is omitted; not because it was not
made, but because it was confined to four. Such a four, though! One can
hardly realize any were left out. Be sure they will come in for ample
mention. Will it seem sacrilegious to admit several hours of one
afternoon were devoted to the Lateran, and the rest to watching the
queen and “lesser mortals” coming home from the races? Life is a very
mixed sort of affair here -- “Motley’s the wear,” indeed, and there’s
nothing to be done but “Being in Rome to do as Romans do.” The only
saving clause is I did not hurry through the church because of the
carnival ahead.

I began with the Piazza di San Giovanni and its great obelisk -- “the
largest in existence,” erected some fifteen hundred years ago by an
Egyptian king in front of the Temple of the Sun, at Thebes. I felt that
it had strayed “far away from its native heath.” This is one of eleven
obelisks brought from far eastern climes to grace this imperial city.
The conqueror has a right to his spoils, I suppose, or this might be
called vandalism. In the Baptistery, I saw the font of green basalt in
which tradition says Constantine was baptized; and in its several
chapels, Mosaic frescoes dating as far back as the Fifth century. They
were more curious than beautiful, the figures representing Christ,
apostles and saints, being decidedly of a caricature order. But
one -- flowers and birds on a gold ground, and another -- golden arabesques
on a blue ground -- were more successful, indeed beyond criticism. I
lingered long at the foot of Santa Scala, “that flight of twenty-eight
marble steps from the palace of Pilate at Jerusalem, which Christ is
said to have ascended once,” and which are now set aside for the devout
to ascend on their knees only. Many were doing it as I watched -- men,
women and children; old and young; rich and poor. To the looker-on it
would seem rather an acrobatic feat, than an act of devotion.

At five o’clock, we took our station on the wayside, one of a “jam” of
carriages to wait for the coming of the royal cortege! In the intervals
of waiting, I amused myself pointing out the coroneted equipages; they
clustered around, their occupants apparently quite as eager as we to see
the spectacle. Presently the chatter was hushed; eye-glasses of all
kinds were adjusted; everybody’s gaze was on the Porta San Giovanni; a
flash of scarlet shot through its arch; the jockey who always precedes
the queen’s carriage, itself with its four steeds, most richly
caparisoned -- the coachman and two footmen in the brilliant scarlet
uniform of the queen; and inside, the beautiful, gracious, happy-looking
Marguerite, a queen indeed, if looks and bearing count! She bowed so
queenly, and smiled so womanly, right and left, I no longer wonder that
her subjects worship her. A number of gorgeous equipages followed; the
pageant swept on, and the chill dusk hurried us home.

Another church was the quaint old building of St. Onofrio, on the
Janiculus. It was reared to commemorate the piety of that saint, shown
by a life of sixty years’ hermitage in the desert, reducing himself to
the level of the brute creation. I confess my pilgrimage to his shrine
was not from sympathy with any such idea of piety. Nor has it much in
the way of art. Three frescoes by Domenichino, and one fresco, faded and
injured by retouching, by Leonardo da Vinci, are all worth speaking of.
But Tasso is buried there, and the cell he occupied is shown, full of
souvenirs of him. It is a large room, with three windows, and commands
some fine views. The souvenirs are a fresco portrait of him, life-size
and most startlingly life-like; a bust in wax, autograph letters,
chairs, etc. There is a garden attached, in which is an oak under which
he used to sit. The view from that “coigne de vantage” is lovely. I
seated myself where he might have sat to enjoy it. But -- you have read
about the pretty, glancing, green and gold lizards of Italy! Well, it
seemed to me there was one at least to every blade of grass, to every
twig, where anything could glide or dangle. A lady had carried one home
with her the day before in the folds of her dress. I was not very
ambitious to follow her example, so, perhaps very ingloriously, I
decamped without delay.

There is a set of churches, three in number, called “The Three Churches
of the Aventine,” from their being situated on that hill. Each has
something of special interest, but I shall tell of only one, that of St.
Sabrina. It contains Sassoferrato’s masterpiece, the “Madonna of the
Rosary,” a really beautiful and interesting picture of this
inexhaustible subject. The Madonna is giving a rosary to St. Dominicus,
and the Christ-child another to St. Catherine; the latter with a
childlike delight and benevolence in the giving, most admirably
rendered. On the pillar in the nave is a good-sized black bowlder, with
the legend attached that it was hurled by the devil at St. Dominicus
when at prayer; such was his fury at this pious act. The flagstone on
which the saint was kneeling was also shown. It has been removed from
the floor and built into the wall. There is an orange tree in the
garden, still vigorous and beautiful, planted by St. Dominicus. The good
brothers make crosses and rosaries of its wood and sell them, thus
“making an honest penny.” We bought some and took them to the pope to
be consecrated!

This prowling about old churches, hunting up celebrated pictures,
relics, legends, etc., comes to be a great fascination. As they are
counted by hundreds, one can always have a place to go. The trouble is
to make a selection. And -- it is just as perplexing which to tell you
about. There is one more, though, I do not like to leave out. It is
small and not at all striking; stands beside the great Doria palace on
the Corso, and right in the way, but comparatively few enter it. The
name is St. Maria in Via Lata, and it is the church in which St. Paul
and St. Luke taught.

There are really two churches, one entered from the street and the other
beneath it, reached by descending a flight of steps. The latter is the
one where the apostles preached, and very small and humble and dark; the
custodian carried lighted tapers to insure our seeing. There were some
faded frescoes on the walls, a well, the water of which burst forth
miraculously for the baptism of converts under their preaching; and
there is a fragment of the ancient Servian wall in one end that is very
curious, with its huge blocks of stone arranged both upright and
horizontally. In the upper church is preserved that remarkable picture
of the head of Christ “begun by St. Luke and finished by an angel.” It
is kept closely shut up in a cabinet over the alter, but a silver lira
won an inspection. Faded, dingy, crude, all that can be said is that
neither of the accredited artists could have worked from especial
training or inspiration! From churches to studios -- a natural transition.
What galleries the former have been, and are, for the latter.

Strolling through the Via Margutta -- “the artist’s quarter” -- a large
building arrested attention. On inquiring, we found, among many other
studios in it, those of our Rodgers and Ives. Applying quite
unceremoniously for admittance to the first, was accorded at once, and
the son of Mr. Rodgers advanced and received us most courteously, and
conducted us through several rooms, full of the completed works of his
father, and a number of work-rooms full of busy workmen. Among the many
admirable finished works, four particularly interested us: “The Lost
Pleiad,” “Ruth,” “Somnambulist” and “The Blind Girl of Pompeii.” Never
was the groping movement peculiar to the blind so touchingly rendered as
in that slight, girlish figure. She is pressing forward against a
strong wind, which is shown by the way her hair and skirts are blown
backward, grasping her staff, and feeling her way equally, as it were,
with it, and the sightless orbs directed so intently before her. What a
curious mastery of the “cold, insensate marble” that can make the heart
ache so!

We were equally unceremonious and fortunate in our reception at the
studio of Mr. Ives. He was just going out, but turned at once, and
accompanied us with the utmost kindness and graciousness through his
rooms. There, too, were many well-filled, and others where the workmen’s
chisels were busy. It was interesting to pause and watch the tiny chips
and threads of marble dust as made under their skillful touches, and
mark the delicate finish given thereby to lip and brow, the more tender
curve to the dainty shoulder, the more graceful sweep to the trailing
drapery. I gazed longest on a “young Bacchus,” a drooping “Ariadne,”
that half elf, half human “Undine,” and that nymph of wood, water and
wisdom, “Egeria.” The last, especially, drew me to it again and again.
It is a sitting statue inclining somewhat forward, gazing earnestly at
the right foot extending before it, and from the toes of which streams
of water are gushing. The left foot is drawn back and is resting on the
tip of the toes. There is little drapery, but the little is exquisitely
wrought. The features are of ethereal beauty; the hair is arranged in a
simple Grecian knot. She is sitting on a stump entwined with ivy; around
its roots the wild acanthus spreads its beautiful leaves. The lovely
creature! I think it will haunt me forever.

The third studio was that of an Italian artist. Besides his pictures,
the rooms were adorned with tapestries, rugs and bric-a-brac. There were
some most ingenious exhibitions of taste. In one room the light fell on
crayons on glass, most attractive pictures. Passing to another room
behind this, the light shone through these, converting them into
exquisite transparencies. It was a desire to light what would have been
otherwise a dark room, without marring the walls of the others by
introducing windows. There were some portraits on his walls, wonderful
as paintings, and carrying conviction of their faithfulness as
likenesses. One was a queenly woman, with that splendid texture of flesh
so often described by the words, “you can almost see the bones through
it,” because of its transparency, features “clean cut as a cameo,” a
warm fine glow on the cheek; elsewhere that pinkish pearl hue of youth
and health; and heavy masses and braids of the richest golden hair, with
the very glint of the burnished metal on it. I felt like plucking out a
strand or two that they might never be turned to silver, and thinking of
Aurora Leigh, kept asking myself “how many ingots went to make that
dazzling sheen?” So realistic was this “vision of beauty,” one could
easily believe it would turn and answer, did you speak to it.

It was, however, the last studio of the four where I went oftenest and
lingered longest, and always with increasing pleasure -- that of Dwight
Benton, formerly of Cincinnati, and who favors the “Commercial” now and
then with a delightful letter. Doubtless you have read them. His studio
consists of two spacious rooms, most admirably lighted and tastefully
fitted up. It is a gallery in itself, with its walls covered with
“studies,” and its many easels filled with wonder-works of his never
idle brush! Of late years he paints landscapes exclusively, and it may
be added “con amore.” Such enthusiasm is bound to tell -- so there are
scenes from Capri that do not seem to belong to canvass at all -- that
strip of beach is there to stroll on; those cliffs you will climb sooner
or later; the chickens aroost in the little boat drawn up in the shadow
of a corner of that quaint old house, will have to fly for it by and by,
when you will want it for a sail; in a few moments you are going up the
steps to follow that tall, stately-looking peasant woman just
disappearing in that old house, for you are eager to explore it. You
look further! On another easel is a stretch of the Campagna, seen beyond
and through some near ruins. There are patches of sunlight on the grass,
not paint, but the warm, intangible sunbeams that drop from the sky to
the earth -- that wonderful Campagna! It rolls away in shifting arabesques
and mosaics of all the hues

 “That in the colors of the rainbow live
 And play in the plighted clouds,”

till afar off it strikes that line of mountains, with their top lost in
great masses of tossing, seething storm-clouds, or veiled in depth after
depth of bluest mist. It seems as if he had wrenched the reality itself
from the out-door world, and flung it on the canvass. The gaze wanders
from one easel to another with long pauses at each. How I wish I could
do them the faintest justice with any words of mine. I can give the
subjects and the features, but those miracles of atmospheric effects
wrought apparently with as little effort by this artist’s brush as if by
enchantment -- it is those that are unutterable, indescribable, and must
be seen by one’s own eyes. I consider myself most fortunate in having
secured two of his smaller canvasses “to be a possession forever.” The
larger is a Capri scene of coast and cliff; the white-crested waves are
rolling in gently, and breaking upon the former; the ruins of the palace
of Tiberius crown the latter. It is a picture of striking individuality
and specially characteristic of this foreign world. The other is a
subject of pathetic interest, which he calls “Shelley’s grave.” It
represents the coast near Spezzia, where the body of the poet was washed
ashore, found and interred for a time. A simple cross marks the grave. A
somber sky, the low coast, a little strip of beach, the grass and weeds
and sedgy growth peculiar to such a spot, with a rude cross, that is
all. But what a story it tells! So anxious am I that others may have an
opportunity to see and appreciate this home artist, I shall make a
special point with my old friends of the book-store of The Robert Clarke
Company, Cincinnati, of having these placed in their windows as soon as
they reach the United States. One so gifted in his profession, and of
such high worth in every phase of character as Mr. Benton, should have
most ample recognition from his fellow-countrymen.

L. G. C.

Rome, May 2, 1883.


MAIORI.


Do not trouble to tell me: I know I have been delinquent. But then that
is not one of my “too many and too-tedious-to-make-mention of feelings.”
So the one time can be blinked at. Especially if you remember the
scripture injunction. If you are like me you never do unless you want
to.

Of course your letter came and I had my habitual “good intentions,” but
well, to be honest, I am sure I do not know what became of them. I only
realize that the days “shod with silver speech,” and muzzled with golden
speechlessness, have slipped away and given no warning, till I should be
afraid to try to count them. Let them go, and be magnanimous enough to
bear no malice. That comes so easy to me I can recommend it without any
tinges of that inward monitor yclept conscience. It would be the 13th
labor of Hercules to attempt to fill up this interval. My brain reels at
the mere mention. But I will just give you a mosaic of random tiles. You
will like it just as well. In any case you would feel called on to
groan critically and perhaps cry aloud: “The old flippancy! What a
butterfly she is.” You know I do not mind.

One of the party, the “lord of creation,” you may be sure, had the fever
at Rome, to his supreme disgust, not the Roman, but typhoid. He was sick
two months. This, of course, was a cloud. But he is a darling, and just
to get him well again was our supreme anxiety. As soon as he was well
enough to travel without risk, he was ordered here to escape Roman
lassitude and be “built up.” Last Monday we started, “coming by easy
stages.” Naples was our first resting-place. We remained till Saturday.
By that date the invalid through much eating and drinking shed even the
rôle of a convalescent, and “Richard is himself again,” was asserted in
every look and act. But we have come on here all the same. I wish you
could spend just one day if no more with us. Such a dream-place as it
is! Words can never picture it to you, but the cousins in chorus,
declared I must write and tell you all about it. As if I could! Why
you? They did not say. I did not ask. I suppose because they are
ready to hear another of your letters read. You see they have not such
a funny, audacious correspondent as you on their list.

But to this “castle in Spain,” this “Palace Beautiful,” this “stately
pleasure dome,” this “Dream Perch,” this “Hotel Torre di Mezzacapo,” on
the “blue Meditterranean’s” loveliest inlet, the Gulf of Salerno. Oh,
dear. How to put it into words! It is an ancient castle, built on and
out of, and into, a lofty cliff, hanging right over the water. I could
cast my lines into its clear depths and angle to no end of capture, if
they were long enough. They would have to measure 90 meters (300 feet)
though to touch water. Who would help me land my whales? A Cornichean
road, the ideal highway of creation, winds past its base to Amalfi. I
hope you know Longfellow’s poem of that name. Sheer down the solid rock
drops to the wavelets’ foam-tipped caress. I can hear them when I bend
over the parapet of my terrace so high above them in the air. From that
highway, superb-macadamized, the ascent to our doorway is a tortuous,
devious, steep climb. A little donkey-cart does it. Two at a time
inside, outside the driver alongside the poor beast and with a desperate
clutch of its loose hide to help it to keep its feet, and like poor Joe,
“keep moving on.” As I caught sight of that grip, a flash of memory
gave back a description read long ago, of an exceedingly high-bred
aristocratic, “black and tan terrier -- its skin was at least two and
one-half sizes too large for it.” Poor little donkey! I can fancy him
braying his loudest that dying refrain of the woman,

 “Glory! hallelujah! I am going where
 There’s no more hard work to do.”

After he landed the four of us “safe and sound,” he dragged up with
equal faithfulness our four “Saratogas.” When I saw that, I cowered into
a corner and hid my eyes. How I hated that trunk of mine! I think that
particular donkey ought to be canonized and made a “constellation” in
one of the unoccupied places of honor in the sky. Up here we see “an
inclosed world of beauty.” The vague distance of the sea, where the eye
gets lost directly; the long, low promontory or cape, where Paestum lies
stranded in blue mist; mountains that lift themselves up so high they
win crowns of snow for their temerity; great, soaring, jagged, curiously
rent cliffs, many with their sheltered sides fashioned into terraces set
in fruitful lemon and orange groves; the indented coast, with many a
pretty bay and baylet and little stretches of exquisite beaches; and
countless villages in the tenderest tones of white, gray, drab, etc. It
is a wonderful scene, and so soporific I could fall asleep this very
instant. It is Sunday all the time. The town of Maiori lies far below us
on the northeast, with a population of six thousand, an exquisite bit of
harbor and lovely beach. I see pretty little craft, of many styles and
sizes, run up on the last. Now and then, out on the water, a microscopic
sail attached to a little black speck, or a lazily propelled row-boat,
breaks up “the death in life” of the scene. They tell me as a fact that
can be verified, of other breaks of the following ilk, if one
chooses to hang by the hour over the parapet of the different terraces
or esplanades: a rattle-trap of a wagon, with a team of three animals
abreast, mixed horses and donkeys, or oxen and cows, but each one close
kin to my poor “Raffaello” (that is our donkey’s name); a tourist
carriage or donkey cart; or a procession of “beasts of burden,” with
immense baskets, heaping full, or casks of wine and water, or some
miscellaneous burden, borne on top of their heads, and heavy enough to
bend them half-double at least -- in the shape of women. Oftentimes men
walk beside, but never seem to share those burdens.

Maiori lies at the mouth of a gorge, the Val Tramonti. This runs (I
don’t know how far) back through a volcanic district. There is an
ascending drive that is singularly unique and interesting. On both
sides, a jumble of rent mountains; upheavals of beautiful knolls, that
would themselves be mountains elsewhere, in the center of vast basins
and deep valleys. Capping many of the highest peaks are lone,
picturesque, gray old churches, with tall, square towers. The sides of
the mountains are laid out in terraces, covered with lemon groves or
orchards. Continuous chains of quaint old towns nestle in the depths or
perch at different altitudes, so varied in their styles of architecture,
combination of colors, and situations framed in such a novel ensemble,
one is kept in a glow all the way. All this region abounds with such
drives.

Verily, if this modicum of a world is so full of wonders, it is crushing
to try to grasp the stupendous creation of which it is so small a
fraction.

We shall stay here, exploring, perhaps a fortnight; and then to “fresh
fields.”

There is talk of Sicily and Africa, if it continues cool enough.

And to make last week one to “set apart,” my “good brother,” Mr. W -- -- ,
reached me with one of his letters. There are a sacred few who keep us
at our best. The angel -- not the demon -- in us answers to their summons.
Just to be with them seems to banish whatsoever is unworthy. Heaven -- the
All-good -- seems not far away, hedged off from entrance by this and that
device of man; but all about us, with its paths ready and free to our
treading, and its true life not withdrawing and making conditions of
acceptance, but enfolding and making us feel it is our own inheritance
and we can enter into it.

I hope the little book is growing or quite grown. It interests me to
hear of it. Do not give it up, whatever you do.

I noted the recovery of your peculiar and pretty penmanship the moment I
saw your letter. Blessed be the potato, henceforth and forever!

L. G. C.

Maiori, April 5, 1886.






NAPLES.


I think I told you Sicily was being talked of for our next objective
point. Well, we had a beautiful drive to Salerno; from there by rail to
Paestum, where I enjoyed the grand old temples for the second time, the
others for the first time.

We lunched in the temple of Neptune, and I gathered again the acanthus
and wild flowers. The trip was charming, through a continuous garden
with orchards and farm lands.

At the temple, an incident occurred I do not like to recall. I was
looking at some curios surrounded by a throng of boys of all ages. While
deciding about purchasing a very peculiar terra cotta head, they pressed
closer and closer to me. Presently I wanted my glasses; they were gone.
I could not linger. Before we reached the station, they were brought to
me; had evidently been taken from my pocket for that very purpose, with
the certainty of getting a reward. This was the only instance of the
kind that happened to me in all my wanderings.

Back to Salerno, and from there to Pompeii. The whole route was a revel
of spring beauty. Deep valleys, mountains, wide-spreading plains -- “how
beautiful and wonderful all this little earth!” We spent the time till
train hour for Naples in the exhumed city. Nothing more marvelous than
its frescoes so fresh and well-preserved.

Naples and shopping next day. Some friends who had just returned from
Sicily and Tunis came to tell us about it. One brought many Tunis
purchases to show us. Another gave a description of a Tunis wedding,
which, by a happy chance, they witnessed. The bride did not see her
husband for eight days! The display of presents was most gorgeous.

At 4 p. m., we went to the steamer for Sicily. A storm was brewing as we
boarded it, and by the late dinner hour it was upon us in all its fury.
One by one the passengers left the table till I alone remained. The
effect on me was not ordinary sea-sickness, but a kind of torpidity;
once in my birth I could not lift my head, though I was not unconscious.
The storm lasted all night, but the morning broke brilliantly clear and
invigorating.

Palermo at noon; we had to stay aboard



till 3 p. m., to be put through a process of disinfecting. All sorts of
officers came to examine. Barges ran alongside with great tubs of
disinfectant water to put soiled clothes through. Then the dogano, and
such a racket of talk and cries! Hotel des Palmes from the steamer. It
was pleasantly situated and very comfortable, and has a lovely garden.
Before going to bed, Tunis was given up. The cousins could not risk the
sea-sickness.

We spent several days in Palermo and its environs. I think it might be
called the City of Mosaics. Its cathedrals, chapels, palaces, walls,
everywhere were a mass of this ornamentation. We went from one to
another till my brain was in a buzz. The gorgeousness and beauty and
exquisite execution of the extraordinary subjects were beyond
description. Only seeing can grasp such wonders. There was an English
garden full of flowers and familiar and unfamiliar trees and shrubbery.
Indeed, Palermo can boast many gardens. In our drives on the Marina, a
very brilliant feature was the carts peculiar to the country. The body
of the cart, the two wheels, the shafts and the trappings of the donkey
were covered with pictures and designs in the gaudiest colors -- blues,
reds, greens, orange, etc. The peasants in them were arrayed in garb to
match, with faces alight with the most good-humored smiles.

The palaces we were most interested in were those of La Zisa and La
Cuba, of Saracenic origin. The feature of the former was its fountain
bursting from the wall in the vestibule facing the entrance door, and
descending over a succession of steps to the floor, where it took the
form of a simple rectangular cross. Above the fountain was a painted
arch, below which were three pictures in Mosaics. This was very curious.
La Cuba had nothing but a discolored honey-combed vaulting in a small
court. A pavilion formerly belonging to it had been removed to the
center of a garden on the opposite side of the street. We tramped to it.
It had a dome in the roof and an arched doorway, and was built of
massive stones, but otherwise was not especially interesting.

To Monreale was a drive of several miles, to see its Cathedral and Abbey
and fine views. Its Mosaics are celebrated, but I did not dream of
anything like the wonderful Cloisters of the Abbey. The Mosaics on the
walls of the Cathedral cover an area of 70,000 square feet,



representing scenes from both the Old and New Testaments. I could only
look and exclaim.

The Cloisters are all that remain of the original Abbey; they are
quadrangular and the pointed arches supported by 216 columns are covered
with mosaics, all of their capitals and many of the shafts being
different. I could not even faintly grasp the amount of labor required
for the execution of such elaborate work. We had haze, showers and rain
every day, but lost no time from our sight-seeing. One day we went in
the rain to the Museum, where are the famous Metopes, “the most ancient
of Greek sculptures except the lions of Mycene.” These are from the
temple of Selinus, where we were to have gone, but a party of English,
who had just returned, gave such a disenchanting account of the
hardships of the trip, we gave it up. These Metopes are on a sublime
scale representing the contests of gods and goddesses and heroes, and
are indescribable. One is that of Perseus slaying Medusa.

Not tiring of beautiful Palermo, but of the rain, we left one afternoon
for Girgenti, “the most beautiful city of mortals,” according to Pindar.
The railway must have been the work of friendly genii, taste, labor and
abundance of the “coin of the county,” for it ran for miles between
triple hedges of roses, geraniums and cacti, planted in the order I have
named them one above the other.

In Holland the hedges are of poppies, and “Out West” in our own country,
of sunflowers, both such a blaze of color, the one red, the other
orange, as to almost scorch the eye.

The number of ruins of temples on a grand scale in and around Girgenti
keeps the sightseers “on the wing;” and at bed-time, the second in the
little day-book reads: What a full and interesting day! I wish I had
time to tell of these in detail. But Syracuse and the Fountain of
Arethusa! Thither the route was of the most varied. Hills and
wide-spreading vales like our prairies; cities crowning mountains;
sulphur-works and great blocks of it piled at the stations ready for
shipment; orchards, exquisite gardens and vineyards, but no forests,
only a few trees here and there, principally eucalyptus that have been
recently set out. Wild flowers by the acre in countless varieties, one
being a species of clover, the head three, four and five inches long,
and blood-red in color. We stopped at Catania for lunch at the station,
ordered it, and when it was served with one glance let it “severely
alone.” Whereupon the waiter fell into a deep dejection. We reached
Syracuse at 9:30 p. m.

The night drive through the streets to the hotel was beautiful, and we
slept the sleep of those who knew the good things of this world were
awaiting us next morning. What a day we made of it! We rambled through
the Roman Ampitheater; sat where the nobles had in the Greek Theater;
visited the quarries -- quarries are one of the most famous
characteristics of Syracuse -- Euryalis, the fountain of Arethusa, indeed,
leaving nothing unseen. In the quarry of Paradise is the famous Ear of
Dionysius. You may be sure we tried its extraordinary echoes. In
another, that of Latonia de Cappuccini, quarry of the Capuchins, we
lunched. The manager of our hotel was our cicerone, a refined and
gentlemanly person, but we could not induce him to join us, so strong
was his feeling of the difference in our positions. He served us with
gloved hands, and when we had finished withdrew from sight to take his
lunch. We walked around the ruined fort atop of it, and descended into
the depths of its subterranean fortifications. From the top, Mt. Etna
was a sublime spectacle -- its vast mass of snow-covered volcano seemed
lifted bodily into the loftiest heights of air while its base was
enveloped in an impenetrable white mist. Anything more ideally ethereal
could not be imagined.

The Fountain of Arethusa is inclosed in a circular basin, and can be
gazed upon from above standing on a platform with a railing. I looked
and longed to get nearer. The custodian was at hand with key ready to
unlock a gate. I entered and found the familiar quotation a truth,
“Facilis est discensus.” The water was edged with a thick growth of the
papyrus, its long, slender stalks topped with a kind of palmlike tuft.
There was a most enchanting walk from our hotel to the fountain, and an
irresistible fascination found me repeating my visit to it. It took in
one of the finest views of the harbor and Mt. Etna. I often stopped as I
wandered to wonder if perchance I trod in the footsteps of Archimides,
if my glance rested on the same points in both land and water view, and
wished -- how I wished! -- my brain might burn with his momentous thoughts
and calculations.

Exquisite views await and arrest the traveler everywhere in Sicily.
There are some barren stretches, but these seem to be forgotten



as soon as lost sight of. As our train swept on, these were unrolled
before us. Afar off, nestling on the side of a mountain, we caught a
glimpse of Meliti, where the Hybla honey of the poets was made. Once
more at Catania -- it seemed almost a miracle -- we were ushered into a
Pullman palace car! We could hardly credit “the evidence of our senses.”
No cars are comparable for comfort, convenience and elegance with those
of our own native land. It was really amusing to see how soon we
adjusted ourselves to the accustomed luxuries. We ascertained on inquiry
that this was a special train placed at the expense of the Pullman
Company as an experiment. It was hoped and thought it would be a
success.

Directly there was a chorus of exclamation. The seven rocks of the
Cyclops! The rocks the blind Polyphemus hurled so impatiently after “the
crafty Ulysses.” They rise at no great distance from the shore, and from
the size of some of them the strength of the giant must have been indeed
taxed.

Speeding over the plain of Catania took me back to school days and my
mythology. For to a part of it belongs the touching story of Proserpine
and its harrowing pictures of Pluto carrying her off, her arms
outstretched for rescue, and her lovely face furrowed with such terror,
horror and agony as fixed itself indelibly upon memory. “The Vale of
Enna,” with its flowers bedewed with the tears of the tortured mother
and lighted by the burning torch in her hand, as she sought hither and
thither for her lost child -- how strange to think I was recalling all the
story right there upon the ground.

We made but a short tarry at Messina, and then came our reluctant
addio to beautiful, historic Sicily. Trinacria of old, so called
because of its triangular shape. Not anywhere was flaunted that hideous
coat of arms -- the head of Medusa, the Gorgon with locks of wreathing
serpents and the three legs springing from it as a center, representing
a triangle, and the haunting countenance of horror that turned one into
stone but to look at it. Yet, I put the picture of it into my album of
Sicilian photographs!

How the heart aches over the good-byes that we know mean forever.

Good-bye, O lovely Sicily.

L. G. C.

Naples, May 1, 1886.

