March, 1874. -- Went to Italy for a month, via the Mont Ceni. I was
surprised at the beauty of the river boulevard in Pisa, for travelers
rarely mention it. To my mind, it is finer than the Lung Arno of
Florence. Besides, it is something to see a big bridge made wholly of
marble.

The one man of all men in Italy I hoped to see, was Garibaldi, the
Ulysses of the modern world.

He was not to be seen; but I tried to console myself by looking over to
his little island of Caprera, near the Sardinian coast. Dumas' Life of
Garibaldi set my mind on fire with the story of this man. My inn-keeper
at Naples, too, had been with the patriot in all his campaigns.
Listening to him talk was as entertaining as reading Homer.

The scene, when Garibaldi came to Rome from the solitude of his little
island, to enter parliament the next year, was worthy the brush of
a great artist. The Italy that he had made, and presented to Victor
Emmanuel, had seemed to have forgotten the old man of Caprera. He
was feeble and poor and rheumatic. Suddenly all Italy, his Italy,
remembered him. The King sent a gilded chariot drawn by six white
horses, to take him through the streets of Rome. As the old cripple,
wearing his Garibaldi mantle, limped into the Parliament house, every
member rose to do him honor. I would rather have been Garibaldi in Rome
that day, than to have been Cæsar, riding along the same streets, with
slaves and subjugated peoples in his train.

March 5. -- Looked at numbers of the historic Roman palaces. The one
that affected me most was the dingy and neglected old building in the
Ghetto, where the Cenci lived. This immense and half-empty pile, in an
obscure part of Rome, would attract nobody, save for the story of a
beautiful girl, immortalized by the pencil of Guido Reni. All the time
I was within the building, my mind was on a scene in a prison, where
this same girl hung in torments before her cruel tormentors, crying to
be let down, and she "would tell it all" -- the killing of her own father.

And then came that morning before daylight, the morning of her
execution. Herself and an artist are in a cell. A little candle burns,
the executioners wait outside the door, and Guido Reni, to make her
picture striking, drapes a sheet about her head and shoulders, while
all the time she is waiting there for death. Saddest tale of Rome!

Next morning I called at the American Legation. Mr. W -- -- , the
secretary, affected the utmost ignorance and indifference as to who I
was, or whether my card would finally reach Mr. Marsh, our Minister.
I asked him to hand the card back to me, and walked over to the
Rospigliosi palace, where Mr. Marsh promptly received me, and in the
kindest manner. I was in the presence of a statesman and a scholar -- not
a snob.

Mr. Marsh had followed the Italian court all about Italy -- to Turin,
Florence, Rome. He stood high in the estimation of the Italian court
and foreign diplomats. His genius and scholarship were now casting
luster on the American name.

"Don't tell anybody at home what a palace I live in," he said to me,
jocosely. "They will think me an aristocrat over there, whereas I am
the plainest of republicans. Here in Rome a palace is just as cheap as
anything. Everybody lives in a palace here."

In another part of the palace, I saw Guido's great picture of Aurora.
I noticed the mark of the French cannon ball that went through it when
Garibaldi was defending Rome.

Bought a copy of Guido's Cenci, and then went and looked at the Angelo
bridge, where they cut off the head of Beatrice.

I went often to Mr. Freeman's studio. He was the first American painter
to live in Rome. He was, too, the first U.S. Consul to Italy, and he it
was who protected Margaret Fuller, on a time, from the danger of a mob.
It was at the time the French forced their way into Rome. He planted
the Stars and Stripes on her balcony, and the mob fell back. That was
in 1849.

Freeman painted a picture for me that has inspired a poem by J.
Buchanan Read. It was "The Princess." The model was a blonde, with hair
like gold. Freeman corrected my notion that there were no blondes in
Italy. There are many, just as there were in the time of the earlier
masters. Yellow was Titian's favorite color.

Freeman told me much of Rome, as it was when he first went there, in
1840. He lived there under three popes, Gregory, Pius IX and Leo XIII.

Rome was entirely different from to-day. The houses had open entrances,
or, where there were doors, they swung outward to the street, like
American barn doors. There were almost no sidewalks, and the few seen
were only wide enough for one person. The streets were dimly lighted by
occasional oil lamps, great distances apart. Of course, assassination
in such streets was of common occurrence. The water spouts of the
houses were so projected as to empty themselves in cataracts on the
heads of passers-by.

The pavements were made of cobble stones, that had to be covered with
straw or earth when the Pope went abroad in his grandeur.

The city was full of foreign artists, along in the fifties, as now.
Among them were Crawford and Greenough, Story and West, whom Byron
called "Europe's worst painter and poor England's best."

The fact is, West was a Pennsylvania Quaker, though he became King
George's court artist, and at last got buried in St. Paul's Cathedral.

I went often to the Vatican, not to see the palace itself, for that
impressed me not at all, or only as a great and miscellaneous pile,
but to see a certain picture there. The artist who made it was but
thirty-seven years old when he died. Yet, it has been said that in the
"Transfiguration" one sees "the last perfection of art." This picture
seems to be one of those things that no one ever thinks to try to
emulate. Like the Iliad and Paradise Lost, nothing of their kind came
before them, and nothing is looked for to follow them.

One morning I was drinking my coffee in a little den in the Via
Condotti. A very singular-looking man came in and sat down at the
little table next to mine. Hearing me speak English with a friend, he
addressed me. "You are the Consul at Zurich, are you not? You were
pointed out to me the other day in the street. I am Joaquin Miller of
California. Let us get acquainted." I moved my chair and coffee over
to his table. I was greatly gratified at meeting a poet who seemed to
me to have some of the genius of Byron. His "Songs of the Sierras"
have the ring of the master. Last summer I read them in Switzerland.
Their freshness, their flavor of the prairie and the mountain, their
passionate utterance, took me by storm. What the English said of him,
in their extravagant joy at "discovering" a live genius in the wilds of
the United States, did not affect me, it was the stirring passion of
the verse itself. The buffalo, the Indian scout, the burning prairie,
the people of the desert, the women with bronzed arms and palpitating
hearts, the men in sombreros, with brave lives, and love worth the
dying for -- that was what he was writing about, and they were all alive
before me.

Sitting here at the little white marble table of an Italian café, he
seemed all out of place. There was nothing in the surroundings of which
this half-wild looking poet-scout of the prairies was a part. His
yellow locks, flashing blue eyes, stormy face, athletic form, careless
dress, and broad-brimmed hat on the floor by his feet, all told of
another kind of life.

Much of his talk was cynical in the extreme. He was ridiculing
everything, everybody, even himself, and he looked about him as if
constantly thinking to grab his hat, bound for the door, and rush over
the Tiber with a yell. He hated restraint of any kind whatever -- dress,
custom, language.

Miller was now writing in some little attic in Rome, but none of his
friends knew where. He would not tell them; he wanted to be alone.

A boy brought us the morning journal, and we talked of newspapers. I
asked him what English and American papers he read. He smiled, and
answered ironically: "When I want seriousness, I read the London
Punch, and for truth, I take the New York Herald."

There was no talk that morning with him about poetry, but he was jocose
and cynical.

He asked me what I was doing. I told him I was getting ready to try my
hand at a drama. "Don't do it -- all damned nonsense!" he cried. "Dramas
worth anything are not wanted, and if you write in blank verse, as you
say you propose, not one actor in five hundred knows how to recite the
lines. It must be mighty plain prose for these wind sawyers."

Just then a tall, fine looking young man came and sat down by our
table. Mr. Miller nudged me, and whispered, "Bingen on the Rhine."
"That is young Norton, son of the woman who wrote 'Bingen on the
Rhine.'" I looked at him with interest; but he was English, and I was a
stranger, so conversation at that particular table suddenly stopped.

It was on this visit to Rome that I often saw Victor Emmanuel, Italy's
first King. Every Sunday afternoon he drove on the Pincian Hill. The
extreme Catholics of Rome, the Pope's party, paid him little or no
attention, and scarcely greeted him when he passed; but all the rest
of Rome and all Italy nearly worshiped the "Re Galantuomo." He was a
stout, dark looking man, with black eyes and a mustache like a horse's
mane. He was fifty-six years old then, and had been twelve years King
of Sardinia, and sixteen years King of Italy.

At this time our Minister, Mr. Marsh, arranged to have a friend and
myself presented to Pope Pius IX, but a sudden attack of Roman fever
deprived me of the pleasure.

Two men have existed in my life-time whom I should have given much
to know, -- Mr. Gladstone and Abraham Lincoln. Once I was a bearer of
dispatches to Mr. Lincoln, but illness led me to hurry away, after
giving the trust to General Grant. It has been the regret of my life
that I missed grasping the hand of, possibly, the greatest man that
ever lived.


January, 1882. -- The lake and the mountains and the white city do not
seem so beautiful to us to-day, for the little girl who loved them most
of all, lies in the next room covered with flowers.



 * * * * *

All was changed to us this past summer. In October we made a fourth
trip to Italy; this time to the lake regions at the foot of the Alps.
There is something about life in Northern Italy that seems to make
a stay there almost more desirable than in other places in the world.
The scenery is still Alpine, but it is the Alps with perpetual sunshine
on them, and warm laughing lakes about them. I think the peasants
more picturesque here than elsewhere. They carry red umbrellas, and
the peasant women wear short skirts, showing bright stockings of red
or white or blue. The low, white wooden sandals, with the red leather
band over the instep, worn by the women, are very pretty, too. Only
one wonders how they keep them on their feet. With every step the
sandals go click, clack, up and down, at the heels. The headgear of
the girls is a bit of black lace thrown over the head and hanging down
behind. The whole outfit, with the pretty black eyes of the girls, the
bright faces, and the merry demeanor, make one think that here, in the
sunshine of North Italy, is a happy peasantry. The men also wear bright
colors; the poorest has at least a cravat of blue and a red band on his
roguish soft felt hat.

The soft Italian language, and the singers with their guitars in the
moonlight by the lakes, add to the real romance of the scene.

The people of the lake regions are rather poor, spite of the rich
productiveness of the soil. There are too many of them, and too many
rocky heights, and mountains and lakes. The little stone-built villages
cling to some of these heights like crow nests on tree tops, but
somewhere, near to every height, on some spot of land beautiful as
Eden, we see the gardens and villas of the rich. These are the summer
homes of the aristocrats of Milan and cities farther south.

Villa Carlotta on Lake Como, sitting among the lemon trees, its gardens
washed by the blue waters, its halls and salons filled with the works
of genius, could tempt one to want to live there always.

And Villa Giulia, on that fair promontory running out into Lake Lecco
at Bellagio, seen of a summer evening with the deep blue waters on
either side, the snow white Alps in front of it, and groves of citron
and boxwood and lemon behind it, wakes the feeling in one that here
indeed is the fairest scene of all; here one could be happy.

1884


August 4. -- Sunday evening I walked from Bocken to Zurich to take
the train for my new post at Rome. Walked along the Albis hills above
the lake, ten miles. It was a delightful summer evening and the view
of mountains and lake seemed finer than ever before. I could not help
stopping many times to turn round and drink in the glorious scene,
possibly for the last time. It was the only time I ever shed tears on
leaving a scene of beauty. Besides I was leaving Switzerland, where I
had had fifteen happy years.

It was a dangerous time to go to Italy. The cholera was raging in
Spezia not less than in Marseilles and Toulon. Many Italians were
flying home from the scourge-stricken districts, and at the last
moment I learned that a quarantine had been established on the Italian
frontier. I hoped, however, to get through at a little village on Lake
Maggiore. To my surprise all the lake region was filled with guards
and I was soon arrested and cooped up with a thousand others at an old
sawmill by the lake.

For ten long days I walked alone up and down the upper floor of that
big sawmill, every hour expecting the cholera to break out among the
crowd of refugees down in the yard. Once a day a guard was sent to
conduct me down to the lake, where I could go in and swim. What a treat
that was for me! The guard stood on the shore with fixed bayonet,
watching that I did not swim out too far and get away. Mrs. Terry,
our good American friend, happened to be spending the summer in the
mountains near by. She heard of me and, like a good Samaritan, brought
me grapes and other delicacies. We could only stand and talk to each
other at a distance with the line of guards between us.

One morning I received a great big document, it looked like a college
diploma, saying that I had finished with the quarantine and could
proceed on my way.

In the early morning twilight I crossed beautiful Lake Maggiore in a
row boat, and like a bird let loose from its cage flew away to Rome.

Once on a time when my wife and I had been in Rome visiting, a lady
friend said to us just as we were about leaving: "Come first with me
to the fountain of Trevi, throw a penny into the water, and you will
return to Rome." We went one beautiful moonlight night and tossed our
coins into the fountain. And now, sure enough, here I was again in the
Eternal City.

The officials of the consulate met me at the train. I went through
another terrible fumigation for the cholera, and was soon settled down
to live in Italy. The office was at once moved to Palazzo Mariani, 30
Via Venti Settembre, and there later we made our home, when it was safe
for my family to follow me.

My friends, Congressman Lacey and wife, who seemed to be about the only
strangers in Rome, also met me. We stopped at the great, big, empty
"Hotel di Roma." We had it all to ourselves, and we had much amusement
with the waiter, who understood none of our lingo, nor we his, further
than the word "ancora" (more). The little mugs of milk he brought us
for our figs, were but spoonfuls, so we constantly cried "ancora!"
He smiled, and the mugs came almost by the dozen. I was no little
surprised to see on my bill a long list of repeated charges, sometimes
written out, sometimes dotted down, for half a yard. It was the word
"ancora," at a half a franc apiece.

The Laceys left Rome, after taking one long, last look at me at the
station, for they believed they were leaving me there to die of the
cholera.

Rome was as silent as a grave that summer. Everybody seemed seized
with a panic, and fled to the sea or the mountains. I was indeed
lonesome, and with just half of an attack of cholera would have
probably succumbed. I saw little but closed shop windows, silent
streets, and men going about the alleys and corners scattering lime and
disinfectants. Everybody I knew or met carried a bottle of "cholera
cure" in his coat pocket for there was danger any moment of tumbling
over in the street. Away from the office I scarcely met a soul I could
talk with. Suddenly I bethought myself of my friend Frank Simmons, the
sculptor, and was at once ensconced with him in the rooms above his
studio. When not busy at the consulate I could spend my time watching
him turn his live models into clay and marble, and in the beautiful
summer nights we sat up in his rooms and talked of art, and America,
till midnight.

Mr. Hooker, the banker, (what American that ever went to Rome in
the last twenty-five years did not know him?) invited Mr. Simmons
and myself to supper. He lived in the palace once owned by Madame
Bonaparte, the mother of Napoleon. Here she died. The chambers were
still filled with paintings and sculpture and other souvenirs of the
Napoleon family. That night Mr. Hooker, Mr. Simmons and myself sat
till towards the morning round the little table in the very room where
Napoleon's mother spent her evenings thinking of her eight children,
seven of whom were kings.

In a few weeks, the scare over, the people commenced returning. Then
the cholera broke out in Italy sure enough. It was at Naples now, and
with horrible fatality.

The brave King Humbert took train and went there to help and to
encourage the afflicted. He went into the hospitals everywhere, took
the sick by the hand, and possibly helped many a dying one to take
courage and live. He took his own provisions with him, even drinking
water, from Rome, and whenever he went among the sick he smoked
constantly. His staff complained he was leading them all to death, but
they had to follow into dens and holes and hospitals more dangerous
than a battle field.





September. -- My family have come, and now we are all living at the
Consulate, Via Venti Settembre 30.

The King came back to Rome from cholera-stricken Naples a day or
two ago. He has become the greatest hero in Italy. I never saw such
a reception. The main streets of Rome were packed solid with human
beings, trying to touch the King's extended hand, his horses, the
wheels of the carriage. The beautiful Queen Margaret sat at his side
smiling and bowing right and left. The young Crown Prince sat on the
front seat. I did not know a King could be loved so by his people. But
this King was a hero.

The Van Marters had asked me to view the procession from their balcony
on the Via Nazionale. They had hung out American flags. The King saw
the colors, took off his hat and profoundly greeted them as he passed.

I never saw a President receive half the ovation that this King did,
riding through Rome with his Queen and son, and without any escort or
signs of royalty whatever. The vast crowd were simply mad with pride,
enthusiasm and love for their King and Queen Margaret.

October. -- It is easy enough to get acquainted in Rome, at least for
an official; besides, there are many of one's countrymen living here,
and parties and receptions are the order of the day and night through
the entire social season. The members of the consular and diplomatic
corps we soon met, and then there are so many American artists here
worth knowing whose studios are open to all lovers of the beautiful.
We made immediately the acquaintance of U. S. Minister and Mrs. W.
W. Astor at their home in the Rospigliosi palace. There we met many
interesting people.

Mrs. Astor is a young and very beautiful woman, and very charming in
her manners. They have two pretty children. Mr. W. Waldorf Astor,
though a multi-millionaire, personally leads a simple life in Rome.
He is a close student. Every bright morning sees him riding with
an antiquarian among the outskirts and ruins of the city. He is an
acknowledged authority in kindred matters and his papers on the
discoveries in Yucatan and elsewhere, read before one of the learned
societies here, attracted attention. He is not playing ambassador as
an amusement. His legation business is as closely attended to as if
he were a poor, hard-working clerk in need of a salary. There is no
ostentation about him personally. Officially, he attends to it that the
social position of the United States Minister is what it should be.

One night at a dinner party he was relating the incident of a Union
soldier who had donned a gray uniform once and entered the Rebel army
at Atlanta. He had read a description of this soldier's experiences
and hairbreadth escapes in the Atlantic Monthly, and had been
extraordinarily impressed. The soldier's name, as he remembered it, was
the same as my own. Could we be related? I astonished him by saying
that I was more than related, that I was the soldier myself, and the
article in the Atlantic was my own. Mr. Astor grasped my hand,
saying he had thought of that soldier's action a hundred times. My
narrative had made Mr. Astor a friend. He rarely introduced me to a
friend after that without adding: "He is the man who went into Atlanta."

The palace where Mr. Astor lives is the same that our Minister Marsh
occupied when I was here some years ago. It is built on the ruins of
the Baths of Constantine.

I have looked everywhere trying to find the "hills" of Rome, but almost
in vain. They can barely be located, and are not half as defined as the
hills of Boston.

 * * * * *

Yesterday I went to look at the apartment where the consulate used to
be by the Spanish stairway. The consul's little back room is where
the Poet Keats died. I could think I saw him lying there waiting for
beautiful death to come, and I seemed to hear him say to his friend
Severn: "I already feel the flowers growing over me." And I saw Severn
too, forgetting his easel, to sweep and cook and wait and watch all the
nights alone, till the beautiful soul of Keats should take its flight.
The room is a poorly lighted common little bedroom where the poet
died, but it will be visited many a day in memory of one who lived,
not between brick walls, but in high imaginations. We also went to the
poet's simple grave, as we had often done before, and looked at the
green sod above one who

 Had loved her with a love that was his doom.

It was the love for Fannie Brawn and not the bitter pens of the
Quarterlies, that killed John Keats after all. Severn found that out
only six short years ago, when the love letters from Keats to Fannie
Brawn were placed in the now old man's hands.

December 28. -- Spite of bad weather we are having some wonderful
sunsets lately, and strangers in Rome linger long on the Spanish
stairway to enjoy a scene they have so often heard of -- a sunset by the
Tiber.

Last night Madame Bompiani invited us to tea with her. She lives at
the Hilda's tower palace, celebrated by Hawthorne, in the "Marble
Faun." Her husband is a well-known Roman lawyer, and she herself writes
interesting letters to the Chicago Interior. We learned much about
things in Rome direct from him, and after the supper we were taken up
to the tower.

One of the guests was Madame Guyani, a sister of the hostess. She was
a fine conversationalist and interested us much. Only a few months ago
she was a sufferer in the terrible earthquake at Ischia. She is still
lame as a result of the experiences of that fearful night. She told us
all about the earthquake. The night of the disaster she wandered or
crept about the fields till morning. The parts of the island which were
nothing short of an earthly paradise in the evening were only piles of
ruins and dead people in the morning. It was as if Eden had been struck
by a thunderbolt, only here there was a happy, unsuspecting people to
be suddenly hurled out of existence.

Sunday. -- Instead of going to church I stay in Mr. Franklin Simmons'
studio and watch him making a bust of Marion Crawford, the novelist. He
has a good subject, for Marion Crawford is a large, handsome man with a
fine figure and a genial face. There was a joking dialogue going on as
to whether it is the great novelist now sitting to the sculptor Simmons
or the great sculptor Simmons doing the face of a novelist, each
modestly insisting the other only had claims on immortality. I liked
Crawford and his genial ways. I had just finished reading his "Roman
Singer."

Frank Simmons seems to me to be the best sculptor in Rome, though he
is not yet the most celebrated. He does not seem to try to seek fame;
but lets it seek him, which it is doing. Marion Crawford, too, I know,
regarded Simmons as the best sculptor living, and some day he will
make him the hero of a great novel.

Italy is called the land of art and yet curiously there are few great
Italian artists. Its galleries sometimes seem to me like opened
coffins, where one beholds among the bones the jewel work of some
dead age. I feel here much as I felt in Berlin when looking on the
golden necklaces of Helen of Troy, dug up by Schliemann. All the fine
paintings and marbles here in Rome seem like the ruins, relics of
another time. Foreign artists by the hundred, live and work here for
the inspiration they get from the fragments of the past. They taste the
wine made good with age and mix some of it in the bottles of new wine
of their own making. There are more imitators in Rome than anywhere
else in the world.

 * * * * *

The duties of the consulate here are nothing compared with Zurich
or with any other commercial consulate. The office is often full of
callers, but their errands are visits of courtesy or to have passports
issued and the like. The trade of Rome with America is insignificant.

There are two regular consular clerks here, burdened with nothing
to do. The laws provide for some thirteen of these "regulars" in
the consular service, who hold their places for life. They are
rarely promoted, and grow gray doing little. One good, hired clerk
whose staying in depends on his zeal and fitness and not on his
self-importance, is worth a dozen of them. They should be made
responsible to somebody. The salary of the Consul General does not pay
his expenses in Rome.

Palazzo Mariani, where we live, is a very magnificent structure
outside, with great white marble stairways within, leading from floor
to floor. But it is cold as a sepulcher. No stoves and no fire-places
save one little niche in the wall, where a few burning fagots scarcely
change the temperature.

At night we come home (very late, as parties only begin at nine or so),
and go to bed in a big cold bedroom with a brick floor. Our so-called
cook stove is a little iron box heated with charcoal, in a kitchen
about five feet square, but Antoinette seems to know how to broil a kid
on it every day.

Our drawing-room is heated (?) by the fagots in the niche in the wall;
but even this is too warm for our Italian friends, who, when they
call, apologize and go and sit in the back end of the room as far from
the so-called fire as possible.

We have our furniture here from Switzerland, and to us that is a
comfort. Occasionally a couple of priests come into our house without
asking and walk about through all the rooms, sprinkling holy water
on the beds as is a custom here. On going out, they indicate their
willingness for a fee, which is not surprising in a land where feeing
is universal.

Like most modern houses in Rome, our big palace is built on top of a
series of old arches that once supported the houses of ancient Rome.
From our cellar we can prowl around unknown distances through these
mysterious chambers.

The water for the house is still conducted from the Alban hills in one
of the old Roman aqueducts. It is a queer combination, this old and new
in Rome.

 * * * * *

Mr. Astor had written me that last night my wife and I were to be
presented at court. At ten we were climbing the magnificent stairs
of the Quirinal palace to be presented to Queen Margaret. Gorgeously
uniformed sentinels stood on the stairway left and right. We were
shortly escorted to one of the great drawing-rooms of the palace, where
we found other ladies and gentlemen also waiting to be presented. In
a little while we were all directed to stand in line around the walls
of the drawing-room. A dead silence ensued, and then the Queen of
Italy entered at our right, escorted by the Marchesa Villa Marina,
who had in her hand a list of all of our names. A few moments before
she had passed along the line whispering to each of us and confirming
the correctness of her list. Queen Margaret turned to her left as she
passed in and very graciously greeted a young Italian lady, whom she
seemed to know personally. She extended her hand to the young lady,
who, greatly honored, blushed and looked very pretty. This was the only
instance where the Queen gave her hand that evening. As she started
along the line toward us she halted before each one. The Marchesa
promptly made the presentation, when the Queen bowed very sweetly and
made some remarks. I noticed that in each case she spoke the language
of the lady or gentleman presented. I could hear her speaking German,
Italian, French. Certainly she cannot speak English, I meditated, but
in a moment our turn came. Our names were pronounced, and the Queen
commenced in very agreeable English. Her manner was extremely winning,
kind and simple. She "knew we would like Rome," she said. "Everybody
did, and she hoped our stay would be long and very happy." She wore
an elegant gown, cut extremely low, revealing a fine form. Around her
neck was the famous pearl necklace, to which the King adds a string of
pearls every birthday. She carried an enormous white fan of ostrich
plumes which she constantly waved while she talked with us. She looked
the queen, and I thought more German than Italian. Her whole bearing
was graciousness. Her smile seemed as sincere as beautiful, and no one
but would call her a happy, beautiful woman.

The presentation over, we will now be entitled to invitations to the
palace balls and other public functions. There is an American lady
here at court whom we knew in Switzerland. It is the Countess Ginotti,
formerly Miss Kinney, of Washington. Her husband is a court official
and is entrusted with important duties.

Last night we went to our second court ball at the Quirinal. A week
following our presentation we had had the customary invitation to
the first. We go at ten at night, ascend the same brilliantly lighted
stairway as at the presentation, and even more gorgeously uniformed
sentinels line the way on left and right.

The dress is prescribed; gentlemen in evening attire of course -- there
is nothing else a man can do but dress himself in mourning and call
it festive; but so many ladies, in their elegant, light gowns and
extremely low bodices, with swan white necks and shining diamonds, made
a lovely scene. We shortly found ourselves seated among five hundred
other guests in a brilliant ballroom of the palace. A raised dais and
a royal chair stood at the end in front of us. There was a little
gossip with each other, a little wondering at the gorgeous gowns, when
suddenly the music from a lofty gallery proclaimed the coming of the
court. Instantly, side doors unfolded, and King Humbert with Queen
Margaret on his arm, marched toward the raised platform, followed by
the court officials and all the Ambassadors in Rome in gala attire.
We all rise, the ladies courtesying and the men bowing, as the King
gracefully swings Queen Margaret into her seat and takes his place,
standing beside her chair. There is some more bowing and smiling and
courtesying. The music changes for the dance and the guests look on
while the Queen and the Ambassadors and their wives dance the royal
cotillon. The Ambassador of Germany, the head of the diplomatic corps,
dances with Queen Margaret. It is all very lovely, though some of us
guests feel we could beat the dancing all to pieces. In a few moments
the Queen is back on the dais talking with the ladies privileged to
surround her. The music has changed and some of the five hundred
present are swinging in the waltz.

All has been simple and beautiful. Such a ball might take place in the
extremest republic in the world. Some formality, some etiquette, there
must be everywhere. While the others dance, the Queen and the King talk
with the ladies, with the Ministers, and the Ambassadors. I was close
to the King at different times in the evening. He was as unpretending
as any other gentleman in the room. He seemed to have a bad cough, and
his great eyes sometimes glanced around in a strange way. His mustache
is almost as big and bristling as was his father's, Victor Emmanuel.
He has a kindly, earnest look, and Italy has in him a patriotic King.
At midnight everybody repaired to little marble tables in an adjoining
room, where most expensive refreshments were served. Every one seemed
to have a bottle of champagne to himself. I never saw such a flowing of
wines, yet all managed to keep sober. The ball souvenirs presented to
every guest were all made in Paris and of every conceivable and lovely
design.

 * * * * *

We are not far from the "Porta Pia," and often go out walking or
driving on the Campagna. Much of this barren land was a graveyard once,
and splendid broken marble tombs still stretch away for miles. One
can guess at the enormous wealth of the old city by walking for hours
among the fallen columns and broken tombs of the rich out here on the
Campagna. It is as if a wilderness of marble trees had at some past
time been torn down by a whirlwind, and only the debris left behind.

The most impressive scene about Rome is the great aqueducts by
moonlight, as they stretch across this waste of the Campagna. They are
one hundred feet high and built on immense arches. One gets an idea
of what the population of Rome must have been, on reflecting that at
one time there were twenty-four of these canals through the air for
carrying water into the city, and that fifty million cubic feet of
water a day flowed into Rome through them. I was surprised to learn
that hundreds of miles, too, of these aqueducts were built under
ground. A tunnel a few thousand feet long we regard as a wonder at
home, but some of these aqueducts were thirty-six miles at a stretch,
under ground.

The Campagna was honeycombed in all directions by these strange canals,
and the miles of arches above ground to-day impress one more than does
the Coliseum.

However desolate the Campagna to-day, in the olden time it must have
been a wonder with its catacombs and canals under ground and its
magnificent tombs, pillars and aqueducts above ground.

Evenings when the weather is fine we see the Cardinals with their
cassocks and hats of flaming red, taking the air. They drive over from
the Vatican in closed carriages and when once on the Campagna get out
and walk about.

Next to the Cardinals, these Campagna shepherds are picturesque and
interesting. They wear leather leggings, sheepskin jackets, goatskin
breeches with the long hair outside, a red sash and a rakish hat. They
look very much like stage villains, which they are not. When they ride
into town, two or three on the same donkey, they make a remarkable
figure; but a very miserable one, when the one behind is seen jabbing
the donkey with an awl to make him go faster with his load of vagabonds.

January, 1885. -- Christmas Day we went to see the magnificent
ceremonies in the church called the Santa Maria Maggiore. Its forest
of vast marble columns was wrapped in hangings of crimson and gold.
The priests, bishops, cardinals and other dignitaries wore the most
gorgeous regalia of the church.

At the height of the ceremony a part of the Holy Manger in a crystal
chest was borne up and down the aisles, among the kneeling, praying
multitudes. Whatever the history of this relic, I think it was regarded
that day by every one present as very sacred. I never saw a multitude
so impressed with one thought. To many present, death itself could not,
I think, have caused deeper emotion.

Great church ceremonies are all the time going on in Rome, and as there
are more than three hundred church buildings, one can go to a different
place every day in the year. Not at the Sistine Chapel alone, with
its "Last Judgment" scenes, its moving music and officiating Pope, need
one be interested; in dozens of churches great things are always going
on.

 * * * * *

A few evenings ago we were invited to a party at the Danish consul's.
Met a number of interesting people, but the lion of the evening was
Ibsen, the great dramatic writer. He is a little short man with a big
head, a great shock of white hair, and twinkling eyes. I talked with
him some in English. Famous as his dramas are, I knew little about
them, and our few minutes' talk was on indifferent subjects, not
worth remembering or jotting down; only he talked like a very genial,
open-hearted man.

The next day there was an afternoon reception at our own home, and
among our guests was Hugh Conway, the author of "Called Back." He
went with me to a little corner in the dining-room, where we had a
chat about his famous story, his own past, and his future hopes. He
had been an auctioneer in England, and on trying his hand at stories
was astonished to find himself suddenly famous. He was simple, kind
and communicative as a child. Shortly his wife joined us, agreeable
as himself, and they were promising much to themselves from another
season, which they intended spending in Rome. And we were going to be
friends. He told me of their children in England. We emptied a glass
to the children's health, and the next day they started for Nice. He
took a cold on the way, and a little later came the sad news that the
lovable man was dead.

Almost every day, afternoon or evening, we go to receptions. Half the
Americans living here give them, to say nothing of those given by the
English, French and other foreign residents whom one happens to know.
One meets a sprinkling of Italians at all of them, but this is by no
means Roman society. That is something that few foreigners know very
much about. The receptions are all about alike, though differing in
interest of course, according to the personality of the entertainers.
People come to them and stand up and gossip a little; some pretty
girls pour tea, and occasionally there is a song by some visiting
celebrity. Getting a "celebrity" to be at one's receptions and parties,
by the way, is a part of a society woman's bounden duty in Rome.
What lions have we not met at these delightful afternoon and evening
affairs -- Liszt, Crawford, Ibsen, Rogers, Fargus, Bonaparte, Houghton,
the Trollopes, Wallace, and how many others less great. One meets most
of them just long enough for a cup of tea together, or a glass of wine,
a hand shake, a few words, and then "au revoir." Yet the memory of it
all remains.

Rome is always full of great people and they all seem to like to be
lionized. Then there are the distinguished artists of many countries
who live here by the hundred, and who honor the hostess and sometimes
themselves, by dropping in at these receptions for a stand-up cup of
tea and a general hand shake.

We have attended three, four, even half a dozen receptions the same
day. If ever I go into business in Rome it will be to sell tea to
people who give receptions. A man of war could float in the tea poured
out here by pretty girls every afternoon.

Some of the artists also, like Ezekiel, the sculptor, give unique
little receptions in their picturesque studios. These are almost the
best of all.

 * * * * *

Had an interesting letter from General Sherman yesterday.

 "ST. LOUIS, MO., Nov. 14, 1884.

 "DEAR BYERS: -- I was very glad to receive your letter of October
 28, from Rome, telling us that you are now fairly established
 in the Eternal City. Somehow that renowned city did not make
 the impression on me that its fame warranted, but I was told
 that it grew upon every man who dwelt there long enough. I
 hope you will experience that result, and realize not only
 contentment, but gather much material for future literary work,
 because I fear your diplomatic career is drawing to a close.
 It now seems almost certain that all the little petty causes
 of discontent and opposition inside the Republican party have
 united with the Democrats and elected Cleveland President. When
 installed next spring he will be a stronger man that he has
 credit for, if he can resist the pressure sure to be brought on
 him, and consulships will be in great demand, for distance lends
 enchantment, and exaggerates the value of such offices. I have
 no fear of violence, and believe that Cleveland will not allow
 the solid South to dictate to him. If he does, and the old Rebels
 show the cloven foot, the reaction four years hence will be
 overwhelming.

 "We are all very well in St. Louis, and the autumn has been
 beautiful, crops good and bountiful, general business dull by
 reason of apprehended change of tariff, but the country growing
 steadily all the time. My daughter Rachel is in Maine on a visit
 to the Blaines, at this critical period. Mrs. Sherman is at
 Philadelphia on a short visit to our daughter Elly, so that the
 family here is small. I expect to make a short visit to New York
 and Washington about Christmas, with which exception I propose to
 remain quiet. Time, with me, glides along smoothly and I am amply
 convinced that I was wise in retiring just when I did. I don't
 believe the Democrats will materially hurt the army, but they
 will make Sheridan's place uncomfortable. I visited Des Moines in
 September and found it a prosperous, fine city. I should suppose
 you might make it your home, devote your time to literature,
 and give general supervision to your farm. I'm afraid, however,
 that you have been so long abroad that it will be hard to break
 yourself and family into the habits of Iowa farmers. Give to Mrs.
 Byers and son the assurance of our best love.

 "Your friend,

 W. T. SHERMAN."

The other night we were at a private musicale, next door to one of the
hotels. Some girls, and a certain princess, played and sang extremely
well. In the midst of the evening the door opened and who should walk
in? It was Franz Liszt. He was in his slippers just as he had been in
his room next door. He had heard the music and had just dropped in.
Quite a little emotion was created among us all, when after standing
and listening a little bit, he went straight over to the young girl
at the piano and put a rousing kiss on her forehead. She blushed, and
was stamped for immortality. To her last hour she will remember that
approving kiss of the master.

After the musicale I was presented and was glad he remembered me so
well from Zurich. He recalled a kissing scene that I had witnessed
there as well, and laughed heartily about it.

But Liszt is getting old. He has had his day of great life. What genius
and a great deal of work can do for a man in this world anyway! Liszt,
with his genius, worked too at the piano like a galley slave, years
before any soul applauded.

 * * * * *

Yesterday, one of the Bonapartes came to the office on some business.
It was Napoleon Charles. He owns the villa Bonaparte and is a rich man,
for his villa grounds are to be sold off at great prices for the new
Rome rapidly building. I observed him closely because I had been told
that his is the real Bonaparte face. He is taller than was the First
Consul. His family name is still a power in Rome. It interested me to
see one who is closely connected with the Great Napoleon. He wrote me a
pretty French note of thanks, and that is pasted in among my autograph
letters from interesting people.




CHAPTER XXVII

1885

 STILL IN ROME -- PRESENTED TO POPE LEO XIII -- STORY, THE POET
 SCULPTOR -- RANDOLPH ROGERS -- TILTON -- ELIHU VEDDER -- ASTOR
 RESIGNS -- SECRETARY OF LEGATION DIES WITH ROMAN FEVER -- I AM
 PUT IN CHARGE OF LEGATION -- CAPRI -- GOVERNOR PIERPONT -- THINGS
 SUPERNATURAL -- TALK AGAINST GLADSTONE -- SHAKESPEARE WOOD -- 
 SENATOR MOLESCHOTT, A REMARKABLE MAN -- INTERESTING LETTERS FROM
 GENERAL SHERMAN -- PARTY STRONGER THAN PATRIOTISM; MY RECALL -- 
 MONEY LENDING AND TAXES -- KEEP OUT OF DEBT.


February, 1885. -- On Sunday morning we (myself, wife and son)
together with others, were presented to the Pope, Leo XIII. The card
of notification told us how we should dress. Full evening suit, with
black cravat and black gloves for the gentlemen; black silk dress for
the ladies, with black lace veils over the head, instead of bonnets.
Our carriage entered the court yard at a private entrance, where
dismounting we entered at a side door and went up the Bernini stairway.
The Swiss guards, glad to hear their own tongue spoken, were very
polite to us. Colonel Schmidt, their commander, is also a personal
friend, who had visited us in Switzerland. He soon turned us over to
the Pope's personal body guard. These are young Roman nobles. We were
led through a labyrinth of apartments, and put in charge of some of the
court officers at the reception room.



"The reception will take place in just thirty minutes," said one of the
officials, and this gave us time to look out of the window, and wonder
what part of the enormous pile called the Vatican, we were in.

Outside, the four thousand room building, with its two hundred
stairways, looks like an ugly collection of big yellow factories.
Inside, it is all magnificence. We were standing in rooms where the
Popes ruled Rome, at a time when Rome ruled the world. The history of a
thousand years was made and written under this roof. The genius of many
ages found a resting place here. Here for centuries God, himself, was
supposed to have his only agent on earth.

Just as we were meditating on all this, a rustle of officers entering
the room is heard. We are placed in a line, single file, around the
walls of the apartment. "You will all kneel," whispers an official, "as
his Holiness enters." That moment the door opened, and Leo XIII, robed
in scarlet, entered the room. Everybody knelt. As he passes the door an
attendant draws the scarlet robe away, and he stands before us in white
and gold. He is a very old man, tall and thin, colorless in face, and
with silvery hair; there is a soft, sad smile on his lips; his clear,
steady eyes look out of a kindly face. He motions us all to rise, and
then slowly walks around the room, speaking a gracious word to each as
presented. An official walks with him carrying a list of our names.
The Pope's half-gloved hand with the signet ring, is held forward for
us to kiss. His words are kindness itself. I never saw so saintly a
face before. I do not wonder that many in the room are weeping. They
are faithful Catholics and this moment is the event of their lives.
Some have traveled ten thousand miles to have that white hand placed on
their heads with a blessing. To them, the doors of paradise are this
moment visibly opening.

Everybody, Catholic or not, was affected. Shortly the kindly voice
comes to us, "And you are from America -- America -- good, far off
America," he says in English, and then changes to French, and Italian.
He placed his hand on our heads and blessed us -- and, believing or
disbelieving -- a feeling of a holy presence moved us.

Shortly, a signal indicated that all should come to the center of the
room and kneel, and then a blessing was asked on the lands from which
we came. It was an impressive moment. Numbers kneel down and kiss the
gold cross on his embroidered slipper. An attendant enters, throws the
scarlet robe gently over his shoulders again. There are some kindly
smiles, a bow, and the Pope leaves the room. Our reception at the
Vatican was over.

 * * * * *

Last evening visited Mrs. Greenough, wife of the celebrated sculptor.
They have lived here many years. She is an interesting woman, but
delicate as a lily. She talked much of Margaret Fuller, whom she had
known well for many years.

We find many self-expatriated Americans here, first-class snobs, mostly
a rich and terribly stuck-up gentry, hanging around the edge of Italian
society, watching opportunity to pick up an alliance with somebody with
some sort of a title. They are usually ashamed of their own countrymen,
even those of them who are here, and regard themselves entirely too
good to be Americans. It is a great pity in their minds that they
were born in the United States at all, where, likely as anyway, their
fathers made their fortunes selling hides and hominy.

 * * * * *

March 21. -- Spent last evening till very late, sitting on the steps
of Frank Simmons' studio, talking with W. W. Story, sculptor and poet.
He is the finest talker I ever heard. Of course, he knows everything
about Italy; he has lived here most of his life, and his "Roba di Roma"
tells more worth knowing about Rome than any similar book ever written.
We talked, too, of America. He lamented that he had never achieved
distinction in the United States as a poet. That, not sculpture, had
been his first ambition. I told him he did not know how many loved his
name at home for the poetry he had written. On my last trip over the
sea, a young and discriminating newspaper man had envied me that I was
going where I would know Story, the poet. He had committed "Antony
and Cleopatra" to memory, repeated it to me walking on the ship deck
one evening, and said it was the "best American poem." The incident
gratified Mr. Story very much, as it should.

We spoke of the Washington monument at the capital. "It is nothing
but a great, high smoke stack," he said. "There was a design offered,
for a monument, that had some taste, art, grandeur about it, but the
mullet-headed politicians, knowing nothing, and thinking they knew
everything, naturally threw that aside."

There was but little outlook, he said, for any immediate realization of
true art in America. "There was but one god there -- money getting."

I liked Mr. Story's generosity of speech concerning other sculptors
less famous than himself, and for poets with less renown than he
believed he had. He is altogether one of the most agreeable men I ever
knew. His studio is full of fine work that brings great prices, but it
does not seem to me greater than the work of Frank Simmons, or even
some of the statues of Ives and Rogers. There is a sea nymph at Ives'
studio more beautiful than anything else I ever saw in marble.

We often go to the studio and the home of Randolph Rogers. He is an
invalid, has been paralyzed, and sits most of his time in his chair;
but he has a great, big, joyous heart, and is happy at seeing his
friends. His fame is very wide. His "Blind Nydia" is one of the great
things in marble. Very many copies of it have been made. They are
everywhere. "Nydia" and his bronze doors at the Capitol in Washington,
more than all else, made his reputation.

I have met no one in Rome who seemed to retain his real, joyous,
bluff Americanism as Mr. Rogers does. He knows his art, but he has not
forgotten his country.

His home is one of the most delightful here. He is justly proud of his
wife, as she is proud of his art. "She must have been very beautiful in
her youth," said an American innocently. "Yes," replied Mr. Rogers, "my
wife is beautiful now."

The other morning occurred the wedding of his daughter to a worthy and
handsome officer of the Italian army. Every hour he is expecting orders
to go to Africa to help avenge the massacre of a lot of his countrymen.

Mr. Tilton, the American painter, showed us a Venetian scene yesterday
of supreme loveliness, as most of his water scenes are. I never saw so
much delicious coloring as is always in his pictures of the Adriatic.

He sells mostly to the English, and at great prices. He showed me his
selling book, and I was astounded at what he got. It was pounds, where
others of our artist friends got dollars.

Went to Elihu Vedder's studio. He received me very coolly at first,
because he thought I mispronounced his name; a very important matter.
Afterward, he took some pains to show me his work. It is certainly
characteristic, at least, and original, and nobody ever misses guessing
whose picture it is, if it should be from his brush.

March 25. -- Mr. Pierpont, the Secretary of Legation, is down with the
Roman fever. Strong and young and handsome as he was, constant late
hours and cold stone floors were too much for him. He may never recover.

His coming here was almost a sensation, and no one ever got into "good
society" in Rome so promptly. His handsome face, genial ways, good
family and fine talents have made him welcome everywhere. He is a son
of Attorney General Edwards Pierpont, of New York, once Minister to
England.

They have taken him to the German hospital up by the Capitol. What
makes his illness worse just now is that Mr. Astor, the Minister, has
sent in his resignation and will go home at once.

April, 1884. -- Went to the Island of Capri, only a couple of hours'
sail from the most beautiful bay in the world. This is the spot where
the Garden of Eden ought to have been.

Went to the Blue Grotto -- wonderful! While floating about there in a
little boat, I thought of T. Buchanan Read's lines:

 Oh, happy ship to rise and dip
 With the blue crystal at your lip

Just mere common existence ought to be a delight on Capri. The
combination of romantic scene, delicious air, blue sky, and almost
bluer sea, make it adorable.

One should need little to live on here, and I think the peasants indeed
have little aside from fruits and olive oil and wine. The young women
are strikingly beautiful.

Tiberius, when he built his palace up on top of this wonderful Isle of
the Sea, at least knew where to find the beautiful.

Ischia, even more beautiful, if possible, is close by, and we look over
and think of the terrible fate of its people only a few months ago.

In front of us is Naples, and, in sight, Vesuvius sullenly smokes away
as if to remind us of the eternal peril to all who stay among these
loveliest scenes of earth.



We visited Pompeii, with its lifted mantle of ashes and cinder, that
have helped mankind to patch out history. I was impressed by the
extreme smallness of the Pompeiian houses. They look like little stone
kitchens. Everything in the excavated city seems in miniature. One
could think of a toy town built of stone, but supplied with everything
wonderful of art and luxury.

I fail to see anything wonderful in unearthing Pompeii. It was easy to
dig it out of its ashes. There is no lava there. And it would seem a
question if two dozen people ever lost their lives in the disaster. It
simply snowed ashes for a day or so, and why should people deliberately
sit there and smother!



From the top of Capri we fancied we could almost see the temples of
Paestum by the other bay, those temples without a history -- those
grandest ruins on the earth.

 They want no history -- their's a voice
 Forever speaking to the heart of man.

And we thought of the Paestum roses, too, of indescribable fragrance,
that bloom twice a year, and that have flourished there on the sickly
desert a thousand years. No story like this in all the floral world.